


1. National Intelligence EstimateSource


Washington, December 1, 1960.

NIE 11-4-60

MAIN TRENDS IN SOVIET CAPABILITIES AND POLICIES, 1960-1965

The Problem

To review significant developments affecting the USSRʼs internal political situation, economic, scientific, and military programs, relations with other Bloc states, and foreign policy, and to estimate probable Soviet policies and actions over about the next five years.

Summary of the Estimate

1. The attempt to forecast developments within the USSR and in Soviet power and policy for five years ahead is subject to some very severe limitations. Our estimative reach in many of the detailed matters discussed in the body of this Estimate is frankly acknowledged to fall well short of such a period. In respect of matters where we have actually made five-year estimates the degree of certainty falls off markedly for the later years. In the summary paragraphs which follow we are dealing with the broader trends which will determine the nature and magnitude of the challenge which the USSR will present to US security in the years ahead. These we believe are predictable in the main, although their particular manifestations clearly depend upon unknown and imponderable factors, or even upon purely fortuitous developments.

The Present Soviet Outlook

2. One of the principal factors which will shape future developments is the outlook of the Soviet leaders themselves. There are two essential aspects of this. One is the Soviet leadersʼ belief, derived from the Marxist-Leninist ideology which continues to dominate their thinking, that their society and the non-Communist world are locked in an irreconcilable struggle which must continue until their system comes to dominate the world. There is no evidence at present to indicate that the Soviets will come to accept a world system which assumes the genuine coexistence of states and ideologies. For so brief a period as five years, Soviet behavior and policy will surely be marked by fundamental hostility toward the West, and especially toward the US as the principal obstacle to the fulfillment of Soviet aims.

3. A second essential feature of the Soviet outlook in the current period is its high confidence in the growth of the USSRʼs power and influence. Looking back to the weak and perilous position in which the new Communist regime found itself in 1917, remembering all the internal and external trials it has survived, and considering its growth in relative economic and military power over the last 20 years, the Soviet leaders are encouraged in their doctrinaire expectations about communismʼs inevitable triumph. That it was a Communist rocket which first ventured into space symbolizes for them that they are marching in the vanguard of history. They think they see a response to their doctrines and influence in the revolutionary turmoils of Asia, Africa, and Latin America. They expect to associate the peoples emerging from colonialism and backwardness with their own cause, mobilizing them against an ever more constricted world position of the Western states. The relative internal stability of the latter at present they see as only a transient phase.

4. While hostility toward the West and confidence in the eventual outcome of the world struggle will inspire Soviet behavior in the period ahead, we do not believe that the result will be policies of recklessness. The Soviet leaders recognize that Western resources remain great, and that the struggle for Communist power in the uncommitted world will be prolonged. They are particularly conscious of the hazards of nuclear war. Moreover, they have numerous problems of their own within the Communist Bloc which may move them to caution. Their policies will be marked by a persistent activism and opportunism, but also by what they consider to be a due measure of caution. More important, however, than the Soviet outlook and aims, especially since these offer little hope for accommodation and genuine peace, are the strengths and resources which the Soviets will be able to bring to the pursuit of their aims.

The Soviet Power Base

Economic Aspect

5. Perhaps the most firmly based of our estimates are those which relate to the growth of Soviet economic power. The Soviet economy has the resources and plant as well as the planning and directing mechanisms to insure steady fulfillment of most of the goals in industrial expansion which the leadership sets. The industrial targets of the Seven-Year Plan (1959-1965), providing for 8.6 percent annual increase in industrial output, will almost certainly be met ahead of schedule. We estimate that by 1965 total investment will reach about one-third of gross national product (GNP), as compared with the present US rate of about one-fifth of GNP. Only in agriculture, which is burdened by a heritage of errors and neglect, will the regime fall well short of its goals, but even here we estimate that output will increase by about 3 to 4 percent per year. The GNP of the USSR in 1959 was somewhat less than half that of the US; it is growing about twice as fast and by 1965 will probably be somewhat more than half of US GNP.

6. GNP is a rough measurement, however. More important in terms of world power competition are the uses to which economic resources are put. The USSR maintains a defense effort judged to be of about the same magnitude as that of the US. The dollar value of Soviet investment in industry in 1959 exceeded the highest US figure, achieved in 1957. For purposes related to national power—defense, science, foreign economic and political operations—the Soviets are increasingly in a position to assign resources freely and without agonizing self-denials. That they are able to provide the resources for national power on a scale equivalent to the US is due to the virtually absolute command which the leadership has over the disposal of resources. It will continue to give the highest priority to purposes related to national power in order to “overtake and surpass” the US. The Soviet regime has bought economic growth and military strength at the expense of the living standards of the Soviet people. But its resources are now great enough so that it feels able to provide for improved living standards also. The consumption level remains low but we estimate that per capita increases will occur over the next five years at the respectable rate of four percent annually. The Soviet challenge in the economic field will be increasingly formidable, not because the USSR has any chance of overtaking the US standard or style of living, but because Soviet resources for the competition in power are already great and will continue to grow rapidly.

Military Aspect

7. As indicated, military power has one of the first claims upon Soviet resources. Our estimates on the development of Soviet military power until 1965 are far less certain than those on the Soviet economy. This is partly due to unpredictable developments during a period of rapid change in military technology. It is due more to gaps in certain kinds of critical information about Soviet military programs. Although in recent years the Soviets have released fuller economic data than previously, on essential matters in the military field they continue to maintain a policy of extreme secrecy, which they evidently view as a major military asset in itself.

8. The most significant development in the military field during the period of this estimate will be the USSRʼs emergence from strategic inequality, primarily through the build-up of an ICBM force, and also through development of its defense systems against nuclear attack. The overcoming of an inferiority under which the Soviets have operated throughout the postwar period is already having a profound effect on Soviet attitudes and policy. It inspires the confidence remarked upon above, has emboldened the Soviets to challenge the West on a vital issue like Berlin, and has led them to engage the West in other areas around the world formerly conceded to be beyond the reach of Soviet power.

9. The Soviet leaders will not be content with the gains in military power they have made. They will seek, by intensive research and development through the years ahead, as well as by equipping their forces with advanced weapons as these become available, to acquire an advantage over the West. If they succeed, they will press their advantage ruthlessly, though still within what they would consider to be the limits of tolerable risk to their own rule and system. It seems quite clear that in their present view both sides are deterred from the deliberate initiation of general war as a rational course of action. Moreover, with the weapons systems now on hand or likely to be available during the next few years, the Soviets probably do not count on acquiring an advantage so decisive as to permit them to launch general war under conditions which would not gravely menace their regime. Nevertheless, they are building their nuclear striking power with vigor, and we believe that they will build a substantial missile force. What we can learn of Soviet ideas suggests that their long-range striking capability is thought of primarily in terms of deterrence, and of employment for a heavy blow should the Soviets finally conclude that deterrence had failed, rather than in terms of the deliberate initiation of general war.2 The Soviet missile force will also constitute an important means of political pressure, even though it is never used in actual combat.

10. In order to deal more effectively with the continuing bomber threat the Soviets are incorporating a large number of surface-to-air missiles into their air defense. They are now also doing large-scale research and development on antimissile systems in the hope of obtaining an advantage in this critical aspect of the future weapons balance. By the period 1963-1966 they will probably begin to deploy such a system, though its effectiveness is uncertain. Soviet research and development effort will probably also focus on the new threat presented by Polaris.

11. Partly as a result of the increased security the Soviets feel they have gained from their development of a variety of offensive and defensive missiles, they have announced a major personnel reduction in their forces, from about 3.6 to about 2.5 million men by the end of 1961. Barring a serious deterioration in the international situation, we believe the cut will be substantially carried out. We believe that tactical aviation has already been cut by one-half and naval aviation by two-thirds, the latter primarily through elimination of the fighter arm. However, the main weight of the cut will fall on the very large ground forces. Even with the reduction, the Soviets will still have substantial field ground forces: we estimate nearly 1.5 million men organized in 65 divisions averaging two-thirds strength and some 60 cadre divisions at about one-fourth strength. The submarine force will become even more than it is today the primary component of the Soviet Navy, and will include nuclear and missile-carrying types suitable for strategic attack.

12. In sum, the USSR will continue to develop formidable military strength despite the personnel reduction. The Soviet military posture is designed primarily, we believe, to deter general war but also to fight such a war if necessary.3 Equally, it is intended to bolster theUSSRʼs power position and thereby to promote its general policies. Soviet capabilities for limited war in areas close to Bloc borders are obviously great, but for conflict in more distant areas they are comparatively slight. We do not believe that the USSR intends as a matter of policy to conduct limited war at remote ranges. However, we do not exclude that, with their current tendency to political involvement in remoter areas, the Soviets may seek to develop a greater capacity for intervening militarily, even if only to establish a military presence, in such areas. A really effective ability to do this would presumably depend heavily upon acquisition of base rights and facilities under friendly political arrangements.

Scientific Aspect

13. The Soviets obviously understand that science has become one of the key fronts in the world struggle, not only because of its relations to military capability but also because it is a major element in great power prestige. The scale of their effort, thanks to the heavy investment they made in training scientists in past years, is probably now roughly on a par with that of the US, at least in some fields of the basic sciences and in critical areas related to weapons technology. Presumably the scope of Soviet scientific activity will broaden as needs in these first priority areas are met. The quality of Soviet scientific work in many fields is now such that achievements conferring great prestige are as likely to occur in the USSR as in any other country.

Political Aspects

14. It is in estimating the political aspect of future developments within the Soviet Bloc that the greatest imponderables intrude. The political system within the USSR itself is stable, and it will almost certainly retain its totalitarian features. The regime will not be openly challenged by the Soviet people, who, even though many of them view it with apathy and ideological disillusionment, are in general hopeful for improvement in the conditions of their life and patriotically moved by the USSRʼs achievements and its position of world power. If there is change in the Soviet political system it will come from the higher levels of the party and government. In the relatively small group which constitutes the real governing class there are some signs of a desire for more regular participation in policy making, and for more reliance in policy execution on professional expertise instead of party agitational methods. While Khrushchev has avoided or been obliged to avoid the arbitrariness of Stalin, among those who surround him there are probably some who would like to move still further away from the domination of one man in the system. Given Khrushchevʼs age and state of health he may not survive as the dominating leader throughout the next five years. His successor at the head of the Soviet Government and party may be more restricted in the personal power he wields, but in any totalitarian system political developments are likely to depend heavily on the qualities and style which individual personalities bring to the exercise of great and arbitrary power.

15. In the area of political developments within the Communist Bloc it is the evolution of relations among the Bloc states which raises the greatest uncertainties at present. In general, the states of Eastern Europe have gained in economic strength and political stability in recent years, despite the continuing alienation and resentment of large parts of their populations. There seems little doubt that, with the more flexible and indirect methods of control the USSR has been employing since 1956-1957, it will be able to maintain a generally effective hegemony. However, China has raised a fundamental challenge to Soviet leadership of the Bloc. Even if some way is found to resolve the issues posed by Chinaʼs desire to pursue a more militant policy toward the West, it raises the serious question as to whether the long-term unity of the Bloc under Soviet leadership can be maintained. We believe that there is a trend away from monolithic unity, and that in the long run, if China is to remain within the Bloc, a looser relationship is bound to develop. The future course of Sino-Soviet relations will obviously have profound consequences for the nature of the challenge which communism poses for the Free World. The West may be faced either with new dangers or new opportunities, or both.4

Soviet Policies Toward the Non-Communist World

16. The general Soviet strategy for carrying on the world struggle in the present phase rests on two propositions. The first is that general nuclear war must be avoided because the costs in physical damage and social disintegration would be intolerable. The second is that the world position and power of the “imperialist” states can be undermined by a persistent and aggressive campaign waged by methods short of war—political struggle, economic and scientific competition, subversion. Political struggle takes the form of a constant agitation designed to capture and organize in broad mass movements the sentiments which focus on the great issues of the current period—peace, disarmament, anticolonialism, social justice, economic development. By manipulating these issues and by dramatizing the growth of Soviet power, the Soviets are also trying to align the governments of the under-developed and uncommitted states with the Bloc, and against the West. The Soviet leaders hope that the result will be a progressive isolation and loss of influence for the Western powers, divisions among them, and a decline in their ability to deal effectively with threats to their interests. This is what the Soviets mean by “peaceful coexistence”—a strategy to defeat the West without war.

17. This is not a strategy which aims immediately at the revolutionary seizure of power by Communist parties and the setting up of Communist regimes. The Soviets know that there are few countries where the Communists are strong enough to undertake such action, and where they themselves could count upon being able to deter intervention by non-Communist forces. The “peaceful coexistence” strategy is aimed mainly at gradually eliminating Western and building up Soviet influence around the world. The Soviets naturally expect that conditions will thereby be created which are favorable to the growth of Communist movements and which will sooner or later permit the latter to acquire state power peacefully, or by revolutionary action if necessary. Even though overt seizure of power is not now the main aim of the Soviet strategy, over a five-year period situations might arise where the gains from such action would seem important enough to the Soviets so that they would be willing to depart from their present general line.

18. The general line of Soviet policy estimated in the two preceding paragraphs falls within a range which excludes, on the one hand, the deliberate assumption of serious risks of general war, and on the other, abandonment of active struggle against the West. Within these limits we believe that the Soviet leaders will display both militancy and conciliation, at various times and in various proportions as seems to them most profitable. However, the Chinese challenge to Soviet authority involves basic questions of foreign policy, and brings severe pressure to bear on Soviet policy decisions. In trying to adjust to Chinese pressures, the Soviets may go farther in the direction of militancy and risk-taking than they otherwise would. On the other hand, if the Soviets should conclude that the Chinese were pushing them towards unacceptable dangers, they might move as a matter of temporary expediency toward a greater degree of stabilization in their relations with the West than they would otherwise consider, though without altering their long-term aim of establishing Communism throughout the world.5

19. As a general rule, we believe that the Soviets would consider that the initiation of limited war with Soviet or even Bloc forces entailed unacceptably high risks and political liabilities. However, it cannot be excluded that situations will appear in which they would conclude that some prize was great enough, and the military and political risks acceptable enough, to justify resort to such action. The Soviets are aware, however, that any limited war carries a danger of expanding into general war. We believe, therefore, that their attitude toward the involvement of Soviet or Bloc forces in local and limited war will be a very cautious one, and will be governed by their estimate of the risks and advantages, both political and military, in each situation. Even so, there is always a possibility that they may miscalculate risks.

20. Negotiations with the Western Powers over outstanding issues are conceived by the Soviets as one of the modes of waging the struggle of “peaceful coexistence.” They hope that the pressures which they attempt to build up against the West will result in concessions at the negotiating table. Intervals of more accommodating behavior and appeals for relaxed tensions are intended to encourage the making of such concessions. We expect this alternation of pressure and accommodation to be the regular pattern of Soviet behavior with respect to negotiation in the years ahead. Since theU-2 incident in May 1960 the Soviets have adopted a hostile and aggressive attitude which has made effective negotiation impossible. We believe that within the next six months or so the Soviets are likely to moderate this attitude and to attempt to get negotiations started again. It is also possible, however, that on the Berlin issue, where negotiation has so far failed to get them results, they will resort to intensified pressure and threats in an attempt to force the West into high-level negotiations under more unfavorable conditions.

21. We do not believe that the Soviets have a five-year plan for foreign policy in the sense that they set themselves particular goals to accomplish within a set time. Their policy is marked rather by an extraordinary opportunism, and in recent years by rapidity of response and vigor in execution. Over the next five years they probably look for new developments favorable to their interests to occur in a number of areas, but more especially in Africa, Latin America, Japan, Indonesia, and Iran. They probably intend to give particular attention to establishing a diplomatic and economic presence in Africa, to stimulating and exploiting movements on the Castro model in Latin America, and to encouraging the growth of a radical anti-American mass movement in Japan. Above all, however, they intend to build up their base of power within the Bloc itself, in the belief that during the next several years they can considerably improve their relative power position vis-à-vis the West. They believe that if they do so, more opportunities for Communist expansion, and more readily exploitable ones, will open up for them.

[Here follows the body of the 92-page Estimate.]



* * *



* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Intelligence Estimates, 11-60, USSR. Secret. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Army, Navy, Air Force, and the Joint Staff, Atomic Energy Commission, and National Security Agency participated in the preparation of this estimate, which was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by all the members of the USIB, except the Assistant Director of theFBI, who abstained because the subject was outside his jurisdiction.

2 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, believes that the evidence of offensive missile and bomber production and deployment shows a definite intent by the Soviet rulers to achieve a clear military superiority at the earliest practicable date. He feels we are entering a very critical twenty-four month period in which theUSSR may well sense it has the advantage. The Soviet leaders may press that advantage and offer the US the choice of war or of backing down on an issue heretofore considered vital to our national interests. [Footnote in the source text.]

3 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, believes the Soviets seek a clear military superiority. See his footnote to paragraph 9. [Footnote in the source text.]

4 The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, and the Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, believe that, in spite of Sino-Soviet frictions, the USSR and Communist China will continue to be firmly allied against the West and will render one another mutual support whenever an important interest of one or the other is threatened by the non-Communist world. [Footnote in the source text.]

5 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, agrees that the Chinese challenge to Soviet authority will, undoubtedly, have its effect on Soviet policy toward the non-Communist world; however, he believes that the relationship of Soviet military power vis-à-vis the US is the essential determinant. Further, as expressed in his footnote to paragraph 9, he believes that should the Soviets feel that they have achieved a clear military superiority, they are likely to adopt policies involving serious risks of general war. [Footnote in the source text.]





2. David K.E. Bruce Diary EntrySource


Washington, January 5, 1961.

[Here follows unrelated material.]

Before Senator Kennedyʼs inauguration, he told Rusk to make me coordinator of the conversations that Soviet Ambassador Menshikov was attempting to hold with various private American individuals. This was quite an assignment. “Smiling Mike” had embarked on a campaign of trying to talk to everybody whom he thought might ultimately have some close association with Kennedy.

I went to the Ambassadorʼs residence on January 5, 1961 and after much drinking and eating, I left and made this report to Dean Rusk:

“At Ambassador Menshikovʼs invitation, I lunched with him today. He said he welcomed the opportunity to talk unofficially with an American private citizen, and assumed the gist of his remarks would be conveyed to Mr. Rusk. His official contacts were, of course, with Secretary Herter. He recognized the impediments to conversation with Mr. Rusk before the latter was inducted into office. He had seen Mr. Bowles, and would appreciate word being passed to him that he, Menshikov, after reflecting upon their interviews, was now ready to express his reaction to certain points discussed by them. (N.B. Would you please pass this on to Chet Bowles?).

“At another time, the Ambassador referred to conversations that had taken place with Adlai Stevenson and Robert Kennedy. He expects to see Mr. Kennedy again shortly. (He did not mention to me his request for a visit to Senator Kennedy.)

“Menshikov observed that he was an intimate acquaintance—indeed friend—of Messrs. Khrushchev and Mikoyan and, to a lesser degree, of Kozlov. He had commenced his career in trade and commercial matters, becoming later a diplomat. He thought that expansion of trade between the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. was of great importance, but did not propose to deal with that subject at this time.

“His principals—especially Khrushchev—believed the coming into power of a new American administration presented an opportunity to resolve existing and dangerous differences between our countries. The atmosphere had changed. Psychologically, it would be easier for the U.S.S.R. to deal with the new Administration than with the old one. He realized nothing could be negotiated until the Presidency changed hands, but, as soon as possible thereafter, serious inter-changes should begin. Meanwhile, he hoped to continue informally to set forth Soviet views as he was now doing.

“Khrushchev felt that, with due regard to the susceptibilities of smaller nations on each side, no real relaxation of tensions could be achieved until the only two great powers agreed upon a program for peaceful coexistence. There are two outstanding problems: first, in order of importance, is disarmament; second, the German question, including West Berlin. This is not to minimize the necessity of dealing with other sources of contention, which should also be considered as urgent. (He made no allusion to China.)

“What Menshikov later said was so nearly a repetition of his statements in the memoranda on his conversations with Messrs. Harriman, Robert Kennedy, Stevenson and Salisbury1 that I do not think it useful to set down his remarks except as they deviated from the foregoing.

“Regarding disarmament, Khrushchev believed there were no fundamental differences between us, as both nations realized the utter and criminal folly of a nuclear war. Perhaps the quarrel over inspection and control preceding an agreement on general and complete disarmament was due to a misunderstanding, or was a matter of semantics. At any rate, if Khrushchev could have a private conversation with President Kennedy they could reach a compromise on a system of inspection and control synchronized with stages of disarmament.

“Regarding Germany, Menshikov confined his remarks to Berlin, and repeated in essence what he had said to Adlai Stevenson. I told him previous suggestions by his Government did not seem to promise a solution satisfactory to us. He answered that Khrushchev was flexible on the subject, and believed he could work out something mutually satisfactory in private talks with President Kennedy.

“He came back and back to the desirability and urgency of the two Chiefs of State meeting, and hoped this could happen before President Kennedy saw Adenauer and Macmillan, the first of whom had been announced as a visitor to Washington in February, and the second in March. I said the report about Adenauer was incorrect, since his proposed trip had been cancelled. I had no information about Macmillanʼs plans, but was not aware of a definite time having been set for him to come to Washington.

“Menshikov agreed that we would have to await the formal taking over by the new Administration before consideration could be given to the possibility of a meeting between the two statesmen. I reminded him of the sentiment prevalent here, of the necessity of preliminary agreements broad enough to warrant a later conference between two or more Chiefs of State. Menshikov replied that Khrushchev thought preliminary understandings could be reached but did not specify how. He said he was sure Khrushchev would be glad to receive a representative of President Kennedy in Moscow to engage in preparatory discussions. I asked if this could be done through normal diplomatic channels. He answered that such a procedure had not been followed in the past, and thought letters between the two Chiefs, and perhaps a special emissary from President Kennedy, might be better. However, he was careful to add this was an entirely personal opinion. He felt himself capable of handling the Washington end, since he had always been kept informed by Khrushchev of the contents of all private communications between Khrushchev and President Eisenhower. He asked whether Ambassador Thompson would remain in Moscow. I answered that I did not know.

“He referred to the difficulties, of which he was aware, on the Western side especially, of bilateral conversations between the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. Heads of State, but thought, by the exercise of tact, they could be overcome, as would also be the case with disarmament discussions, which would have to receive the eventual approval of a United Nations Committee.

“Menshikov started to talk about U.S. mistakes in Laos and Cuba but, after some jocularity over Castro, I told him I thought we better disregard those areas.

“He asked if I would renew this talk on a weekly basis. I said I would see Mr. Rusk Saturday and give him an answer Monday, since it might or might not be preferable to make some other arrangement.

“He then handed me the enclosed paper,2 asked me to read it and, if I wished, to pass it on. It was his personal production and entirely unofficial. I read it hurriedly, and said I would not comment on it today, though, off-hand, I did not personally find his comments on the German question constructive.”

Menshikov sent me a hamper of vodka and caviar and invited me to lunch again. I went a second time, but found his conversation a repetition of what he had said before. During the remainder of my stay in Washington, he suggested I meet him again, but I replied that, since the Secretary of State had taken office I thought I should drop out of any future discussions on the matters with which he was concerned.

[Here follows unrelated material.]



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Bruce Diaries: Lot 64 D 327. Secret.

1 Menshikov had talked with Harriman on November 21 and December 14, 1960 (memoranda of conversation; Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers); with Robert Kennedy on December 12 (Robert Kennedy memorandum to Rusk; Kennedy Library, Robert Kennedy Papers); with Stevenson on November 16 (memorandum of conversation; Princeton University, Stevenson Papers, Box 832, Menshikov); and with Harrison Salisbury on December 15 (memorandum of conversation; Kennedy Library, National Security Files,USSR). These conversations are also summarized in Beschloss, The Crisis Years, pp. 40-42, and in Schlesinger, Robert Kennedy and His Times, pp. 439-440.

2 Not found.





3. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, January 12, 1961.

East-West Relations

At the Cuban National Day reception on 2 January, Khrushchev said the delay in establishing contact with the new US administration was largely responsible for the Soviet partyʼs decision to postpone its 22nd congress until October, according to the Yugoslav ambassador in Moscow. At the same reception First Deputy Premier Mikoyan remarked that Khrushchev did not expect to meet with President-elect Kennedy until “perhaps July.”

This link between the timing of the party congress and top-level East-West talks suggests that Khrushchev hopes to achieve some tangible diplomatic success which could be used to demonstrate the validity and effectiveness of his foreign policy before committing the Soviet party to the kind of authoritative and long-range programs that are enunciated by party congresses. The Soviet leaders may also feel that the Chinese Communist challenge makes it imperative that the party congress take unequivocal positions on doctrinal as well as foreign policy questions, and that this will be impossible until the Soviet leaders have an opportunity to assess the character and likely moves of the new US administration.

The new date for the party congress—17 October—and Mikoyanʼs reported reference to a meeting with the new US President in July suggest that the Soviet leaders are aware that the process of arranging a summit conference will require considerably more time than Khrushchev indicated in earlier private remarks. In talks with Prime Minister Macmillan last fall, Khrushchev mentioned February and March as possible dates for a summit; later he indicated to the West German ambassador that April would be the deadline for talks on Germany.

Khrushchevʼs latest private remarks along this line suggest, however, that he will initially press for early negotiations. He used a talk with the Icelandic ambassador on 4 January to emphasize his public statement that the Berlin problem must be solved in 1961. Unless the new US administration gave an early indication of willingness to negotiate, Khrushchev told the ambassador, the USSR would proceed with a separate peace treaty with the East Germans.

As is often the case when discussing the Berlin question with Western diplomats other than the three Allied powers, Khrushchev tried to cast doubt on the firmness of Western reaction to a separate treaty. He said he was convinced that the Western powers, with the possible exception of Bonn, were not prepared to fight over West Berlin and claimed that even De Gaulle had told him it was natural that Berlin should be under Soviet influence. Admitting that a separate peace treaty could precipitate a crisis, Khrushchev added that tensions would ease after a time and the new situation would gradually be accepted.

[3-1/2 lines of 2-column source text not declassified] As a result of Ulbrichtʼs talks with Khrushchev, the East Germans feel that a summit is not likely until this summer and that the USSR will sign a separate peace treaty if Khrushchev fails to achieve his objectives on Berlin through direct negotiations. Khrushchev reportedly assured Ulbricht that the Berlin question would be solved in 1961.

Moscowʼs relative restraint on Berlin which was evident in the Communist position during the negotiations renewing the Soviet and East German trade pacts with Bonn was again reflected in Moscowʼs reply to the US note of 26 October protesting East German statements and actions concerning Berlin. The Soviet note of 7 January was brief, devoid of polemic, and merely confirmed the Soviet position as presented in the 26 September note.1 In response to an earlier US protest, theUSSR declared at that time that East Germany exercised full power on the territory lying under its sovereignty, “including in its capital.”

The brevity of the latest Soviet note also appears intended to close out the exchange over East German restrictions on West German travel into East Berlin.



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Secret; Noforn. The source text comprises pp. 7-8 of Part I of the issue. The Current Intelligence Weekly Review was prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence, whose staff also produced the Presidentʼs Intelligence Checklist and the Current Intelligence Bulletin, both daily intelligence summaries. Based on the daily summaries, the Current Intelligence Weekly Review provided a weekly wrap-up of the key events as well as special articles. Like the Current Intelligence Bulletin, it was disseminated widely to U.S. Government officials. Excerpts from the Current Intelligence Weekly Review have been included in this volume to provide examples of the kind of incremental intelligence information that U.S. policymakers depended on day in and day out to illuminate developments in the Soviet Union.

1 For text of the Soviet note of September 26 and the U.S. note of October 26, see Documents on Germany, 1944-1985, pp. 720-723. The January 7 Soviet note was transmitted to the Department of State in telegram 1570 from Moscow, January 7. (Department of State, Central Files, 762.0221/1-961)





4. Record of Telephone Conversation Between President-elect Kennedy and Adlai E. StevensonSource


Washington, January 13, 1961.

[Here follows discussion of other matters.]

S: I talked to Rusk and Chester1 several weeks ago urging them to suggest to you or discuss with you sometime what seems to me the most important first thing that this administration has to do—and that is to discover what is in Kʼs mind, if possible. Thereʼs only one way I know of and this would be by direct talks in Moscow without formality by somebody who is not the diplomatic agent but someone who corresponds to Khrushchevʼs concept of power. That is, a political figure rather than a diplomatic one; someone who would go there after the inauguration as your emissary to review the situation and exploit what opportunities there may be. I think it is important to find out what his troubles are—as well as to explore with him ours. I am told one trouble of his may be his health—which we donʼt know anything about.——extremists in the Presidium and China—and what he has to deal with. I think we will not find anyone easier to deal with than K is. I think it is important to find out whether he wants to expand the cold war——if we make proposals on general and complete disarmament—how are we going to proceed—does he want an effective U.N., or is he determined to destroy it?——I know how he reveals himself in conversation—and it could be this could determine quite a good deal, especially if he wants to do business.——What we want to do is discover some means of creating a favorable world order and we must explore the kind of thing we could do—for example, if they would make a gesture of releasing the B-47 pilots2 we could with grace make a gesture in their direction. It would be helpful if Zorin at the U.N. got some new instructions and we could have a more profitable meeting in the Spring than we had in the Fall. I think they have been taking the initiative too long now. This would recapture the worldʼs imagination which is one of the first jobs to be done—and I donʼt think we can do it by being too cautious. I think this is one of the things that you should talk over—I havenʼt been able to get Dean.

K: We should talk about the desirability of bringing Thompson home right away to report, then we can talk to him and see what best way we can proceed from there.

K: Who would be best one to talk to K?

S: I think the unhappy thing is the best one is me. But I havenʼt wanted to suggest this and it would come at an awkward time—but I would do this if it were deemed wise and helpful—and I would put other things aside. The alternative would be Harriman—he has disadvantages in view of the fact he always insists on talking—and has difficulty in hearing.

I think it would be best to send someone K knows and with whom he has had dealings before—someone he would be quite sure would represent you—someone influential—not just a personal diplomat.

K: Good. We will have a chance to talk before we come to a final judgment on this?

[Here follows discussion of other matters.]



* * *



* Source: Princeton University, Stevenson Papers, Box 832, John F. Kennedy. No classification marking.

1 Chester B. Bowles.

2 A reference to the two surviving crew members of an RB-47 that was shot down by the Soviet Union on July 1, 1960.





5. Editorial Note


A Department of Defense study, “Evaluation of Possible Military Courses of Action in Cuba,” January 16, 1961, reported that as many as 100 Cuban pilots were undergoing flight training in Czechoslovakia and that the USSR had delivered to Cuba in the past 5 months at least 20,000 tons of arms and equipment. So far the U.S. had “no evidence of the Soviets providing Cuba with sophisticated weapons such as missiles or nuclear devices, or MIG jet fighter aircraft.” For text of the study, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume X, pages 36-40.





6. National Intelligence EstimateSource


Washington, January 17, 1961.

NIE 1-61

ESTIMATE OF THE WORLD SITUATION

[Here follow sections entitled “I. Introduction,” “II. The Communist World: A. Soviet Progress and Policy,” and “II. The Communist World: B. Chinese Communist Growth and Aspirations.”]

C. Sino-Soviet Relations and the Future of Communism

25. The character of Sino-Soviet relations in the years ahead will have a profound effect upon the future of communism and thereby on the world situation. The quarrel with Peiping has put the Soviet leaders in a difficult situation. They cannot condone Chinese contumacy without losing control of the Communist movement. They cannot permit an open break without losing what influence they still possess over the Chinese and without gravely weakening the international Communist movement as a whole. The Soviet leaders would consider an open break calamitous, but we do not believe that they would go so far in trying to avoid it as to surrender to the Chinese position; both the USSRʼs determination to preserve its supremacy in the Communist movement and Soviet national interest in avoiding serious risk of general war would preclude such a course. We also do not believe that the Chinese would submit fully to the Soviet position; their pride, self righteousness, and national aspirations are too heavily committed to permit it.

26. The issues between the partners are basic, and will probably not be resolved in any clear-cut fashion. The meetings in Moscow in November, 1960, clearly did not produce a complete agreement, or one which is likely to be lasting. The estrangement seems likely to continue, with ups and downs as new issues arise and temporary solutions are developed, and possibly moving toward a looser connection. If the Sino-Soviet relationship does in fact develop in this way, there will probably be a tendency for recurrent stresses and strains to weaken the Communist world posture and to diminish the effectiveness of world communism outside the bloc. In particular, factionalism would be stimulated in the Communist movement, with parties or factions in various countries tending to identify either with the USSR or with Communist China. The two countries would compete with each other for influence in a variety of arenas, from revolutionary movements to world organizations. A further widening of the Sino-Soviet split, if it should occur, would dim the image of the bloc as a great and growing power center and thus reduce the pressure upon peripheral countries to accommodate to the Communists.

27. The cohesive forces between the USSR and China are strong, and we believe that the two states will not abandon their alliance against the West. The Soviet leaders would be confronted with a most serious dilemma, however, if the Chinese pursued independently such a militant policy as to become engaged in a major war. Caught between a desire to avoid Soviet involvement, with its attendant dangers, and desire to preserve a Communist state, with its attendant opportunity to re-establish Soviet influence in China, the Soviet leaders might tend toward the latter course. Thus a wider Sino-Soviet divergency would not necessarily lead to a less dangerous world.

28. It is impossible to predict with confidence the course of Communist policy in the decade ahead, particularly in the light of the uncertain future course in Sino-Soviet relations. We believe that the USSR will stick to its present policy of seeking to win victories without incurring serious risks, and of alternating or combining shows of anger and bellicosity with poses of reasonableness and compromise. We say this largely because we believe that the relationship of power between the US and USSR will cause the Soviet leaders to desire to avoid general war, and that within the limits which this desire places on their action there will be constantly shifting ideas of the potential risks and gains involved in the various situations which will arise. A danger exists, of course, that in assessing the risks involved in particular situations or proposed courses of action, the Soviet leaders might overestimate their position while underestimating that of the West. In particular, they might misjudge Western will and determination in the face of Soviet threats or encroachments. Such a political miscalculation could lead to the incurring of serious risks without the intention to do so; it could even lead to general war.

29. We believe that China will persist in pressing the USSR for a more militant bloc policy. It will continue its hostility to the US, and as it becomes stronger—especially after it acquires a nuclear capability—it might press its objectives much more aggressively than at present. On the other hand, the Chinese have in recent years assessed risks carefully, and despite their bellicose talk they have refrained from actions which involved serious risk of large-scale military operations. Thus, their militancy has been tempered by some degree of prudence, and this tendency toward prudence might in time become somewhat stronger as they become more familiar with the dangers of nuclear war and as they come to recognize the vulnerability of their developing industrial capacity. On the whole, however, we do not expect a general shift in the Chinese domestic or world outlook for some time to come, and Chinese militancy will continue to create a serious danger of local or general hostilities in the Far East, and even of general war.

30. Over the next decade at least, there appears to be a greater likelihood of flexibility in Soviet than in Chinese policy. The Soviet leadershipʼs desire to prevent a general war, the wider range of Soviet contacts with the outside world, the continuing pressure at home for liberalization, and the growing capacity of the USSR to provide its citizens with a more comfortable life—these factors taken together may tend toward moderation in foreign policy and toward a recognition of some areas of common interest with the West. It is even possible that the Soviet leaders will come to feel that the USSR has little in common with China except an ideology which the Chinese interpret in their own way, and that by 1970 Communist China, with nuclear weapons and a population of almost 900 million, will be a dangerous neighbor and associate.



>III. The Emerging Areas

A. The Political and Social Milieu

31. It is one of the key points in the Soviet estimate of the world situation that conditions are favorable for Communist gains in the colonial and ex-colonial areas of the world; there is much to support this Soviet view. The nationalist revolutions in such areas as Africa and the Arab states have been directed largely toward revamping political and social systems in order to modernize societies and to achieve a place in the sun. The Communist revolutions in Russia and China arose from broadly comparable aspirations. Indeed, the system in these countries is widely admired in the newer nations of the world because it has been demonstrably effective in achieving rapid modernization, while the West is associated in their minds with the colonialism which they blame for most of their problems and miseries, both real and fancied.

32. Many of these countries in emerging areas—especially in Africa and the Middle East—are in the charge of revolutionary-minded leaders; in others of them such leaders are making a bid for power. These leaders are members of an intelligentsia who have frequently had an education along Western lines, some of it in military schools, and who have become aware through travel and education—or through observation of the mode of life of Westerners in their midst—of the backwardness of their countries and the poverty of their people. Out of a sense of obligation, frustration, and impatience, they have adopted a revolutionary attitude or taken revolutionary action against the old order—whether it was colonial or indigenous. Despite the Western nature of their youthful training, they tend to be resentful of Western influence and critical of Western methods. They therefore are tempted by communism insofar as it is anti-Western and an effective method of bringing about rapid change.

33. Nevertheless, the revolutionary intelligentsia are generally chary of embracing communism. Some of them have accepted Communist advisers, economic aid, and diplomatic support, and some have even sided with the Communists against the West. But, for the most part they do not wish to accept all that now goes with the Communist ideology—the goal of a classless society, wholesale social reorganization, Soviet interference in or dictation of domestic policy, complete identification with the Soviet Bloc in international politics, and exclusion from Western economic aid and technical assistance. Moreover, many of them have become aware of their own nationʼs history—in some cases a distinguished history—and they see themselves as national figures capable of resurrecting some features of that past and binding them into the new fabric being created. Thus, they see themselves, not as capitalists, Communists, or exponents of any other borrowed ideology, but as nationalists carving out their own destinies and selecting from the past and from other societies the elements with which to fashion new states and new societies of their own.

34. There are, of course, wide variations within the emerging world, not only as among major areas—Latin America is quite different from Africa—but even within major areas. There are wide diversities of all kinds in social structure, degree of advancement, extent of revolutionary feeling, degree of pressure upon available resources, extent of implantation of Western institutions, and cultural backgrounds. Whereas Latin America is Christian, is predominantly Western in language and culture, and has a long history of independence, Africa is a melange of languages, religions, and cultures, and is only now emerging from foreign domination. Even within a continent such as Latin America, there are societies which have passed through a major social revolution and others which still possess small social elites and a large mass of illiterate and poverty-stricken peasants and tribes.

35. There is, however, a large common denominator in the underdeveloped world. This is the political and social instability which is either manifest or dormant and which arises from the rapidity with which knowledge is growing and from the revolutionary manner in which large numbers of people are reacting to the changes in the world around them. Nearly all the nations of the underdeveloped world—whether in Southeast Asia, South Asia, the Middle East, Africa, or Latin America—are beset by problems springing from population growth, lack of development capital, rising popular expectations, internal political strife and competing ideological pressures, lack of political prowess and administrative and technical competence, and an inadequate sense of national identity. While some states, especially those barely emerging from tribalism, as in Africa, suffer more intensely than others from these assorted ills, even states such as India and the more advanced Latin American countries confront several of them to a most serious degree. Many states have adopted strongly socialist methods; some have held to constitutional methods of government with only the greatest difficulty; some have thrown out bloody dictators only to acquire equally distasteful successors; some have taken halting and others more dramatic steps toward the establishment of democratic governments.

36. In states confronted by these enormous problems, the tendency toward some blend of authoritarianism and socialism seems likely to continue. Revolutionary leaders attempting to deal with backwardness, tribalism, feudalism, corruption, economic pressures, and ineptitude often have no alternative but to stifle political opposition. Western states which set store by economic individualism and political freedom will probably be increasingly shocked by methods which will be adopted, but in the eyes of local leaders Western standards of political and economic conduct are likely to be irrelevant to the problem. Revolutionary leaders are likely to expect the West to judge them more by what they are trying to do than by the manner in which they are doing it. If the West does not understand and help them, they will tend to rely more and more heavily upon the Communists, until a point is reached when they can no longer extricate themselves from the Communist embrace.

37. Of all the problems confronting these nations that of the relation between population and economic growth may be the most difficult. Indeed, population growth is a grave world problem, with present rates making for a doubling of the worldʼs population every 35-50 years. In 1930 the world population was two billion; today it is three billion; in twenty years it will probably be four billion; in forty years it may be six or seven billion. Growth is most rapid in the underdeveloped areas, where nearly everywhere it exceeds two percent a year. Ten years ago almost no nation had a population growth rate of three percent; now such rates are not uncommon and there is no reasonable prospect that they can be significantly reduced in the next decade, whatever means might be tried. These increases impede capital formation in the areas where it is needed most, since increases in production simply go to keep alive the larger numbers of unproductive old people and children. In some cases total GNP grows while per capita GNP falls. Standards of living are declining in some countries at precisely the time when the revolutionary leaders now in charge must begin to meet the expectations which have arisen in their own and in their fellow countrymenʼs minds.

38. The problem of maintaining standards of living and even that of satisfying to a degree rising economic expectations probably can be met with substantial infusions of outside aid and with the execution of national development programs. However, even if these countries received outside aid in massive quantities, they would still confront the grave political and social problems of backward and uprooted societies. Indeed, these problems will inhibit both the receipt and proper use of needed economic assistance. The present revolutionary leaders must surmount this great complex of problems if they are to sustain the nationalist character of their revolutions; if they fail, they may be replaced by Communist leaders ready to use Draconian methods and determined to impose permanent totalitarian institutions.



B. International Outlook

39. If, as we suggest above, the emerging countries will be preoccupied with their own problems, their attitudes toward the outside world will be determined largely by the way in which they feel the outside world impinges upon these problems. These countries and their leaders will not be concerned so much with ideological, moral, and cultural considerations as they will with manipulating outside influences in order to protect themselves or to advance their particular interests. The two great powers are likely to be viewed largely in terms of the threat or succor which they will afford.

40. Some of the emerging states have clearly aligned themselves with one or another of the two great powers. Many of these are states on the periphery of the Sino-Soviet Bloc—Iran, Pakistan Thailand, South Vietnam, and South Korea—and their leaders have aligned themselves with the US in order to obtain that military and economic assistance which they hoped would enable them to keep any domestic enemies at bay and to stand up against pressures from their powerful neighbors. Cuba alleges similar reasons for aligning itself with the USSR.

41. In general, however, those who thought they could safely do so have chosen neutralism, and indeed some of them have made quite a profitable thing of it. In their desire to achieve and maintain national independence they have sought to avoid commitment to either side, and they have recognized the value to both sides of their not falling under the domination of the other. This has permitted some of them successfully to seek economic assistance from both and some others to seek assistance from one side by suggesting that they might appeal to the other. Nevertheless, many of these countries, in the course of their colonial or semicolonial history, have been subjected to Western influences and institutions and have therefore come to feel that “neutralism” requires a pronounced reaction away from these influences and some closer relationship with the Sino-Soviet Bloc.

42. This trend has been accelerated by increased Soviet willingness to compete with the West in providing economic assistance and diplomatic support. Bloc economic assistance overall is still considerably less than the US equivalent, but the USSR in particular can substantially enlarge its program. Moreover, the USSR has some advantages over the US in carrying out aid programs; it can move more quickly and without regard to a variety of politically-imposed restrictions which characterize US activities. On the other hand, as Soviet aid becomes more commonplace and taken for granted, the USSR is beginning to encounter some of the criticisms and problems which the US has faced in its foreign aid programs.

43. We believe that if the present trend toward neutralism is not reversed, it will become so strong that it will draw away from the West some of those nations now associated with it. This might come about through revolutions in some of these countries—for example Iran or South Vietnam—with seizure of power by nationalist-neutralist forces; it could occur because existing regimes might decide to seek the supposed benefits and safety of neutrality; it could come about because these nations might decide that the US was becoming inferior to the Sino-Soviet Bloc in military power and therefore would no longer be willing or able to support them.

44. The neutralist posture of these countries seems to us likely to produce in the decade ahead some most serious policy problems for the US. Aside from the probability of withdrawal from Western association and attempts to balance Western with Soviet or Chinese influence, there will be continual pressures for economic aid and political support, for denunciations of colonialism, for concessions on disarmament, and for further Western retreat from positions of predominance or influence. The US position in the UN will probably become increasingly difficult, particularly since many of these countries—including such influential members as India and the UAR—now appear to believe that the UN machinery has been used by the major Western powers and especially by the US as an instrument of national, and hence in their view “imperialist,” policy. For this reason, the idea of revising the UN charter and proposals to bring in Communist China have received widespread sympathy among the emerging nations. Their numbers are now so great that when their views become more crystallized—as now seems unavoidable—the hitherto predominant Western influence in the UN will be greatly reduced.

45. It is obvious that neutralism as a principle is fundamentally incompatible with the Soviet objective of a Communist world. Nevertheless, neutralism may often provide Communists with opportunities for penetration and subversion. Particularly in the areas of the new states, the Communists will seize upon rivalries among nations and tribes, upon the need for economic and technical aid, and upon the naivete and weaknesses of inexperienced leaders. Hence the problem for neutralist states is to keep out of Communist clutches. Nevertheless, insofar as the new and underdeveloped nations can overcome their problems, they may take on a strength and stature which will enable them to maintain their neutrality against Communist pressures.



[Here follow sections entitled “IV. Problems of Western Alliances” and “V. The Military Problem.” The latter is printed in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VIII, pages 3-10.]



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency, O/DDI Registry: Job 79-R01012A. Secret. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Army, Navy, Air Force, and Joint Staff participated in the preparation of the estimate, which was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by all the members of the USIB, except the Atomic Energy Commission representative and the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.





7. Editorial Note


At a meeting of senior foreign policy advisers on January 17, 1961, Secretary of State Christian Herter asked his Special Assistant Charles Bohlen to explain Soviet intentions in Laos in light of the USSRʼs airlifting of weapons and other supplies to rebels in Laos attempting to overthrow the Royal Lao Government. According to a memorandum of the conversation, Bohlen replied that the “Soviets donʼt want to turn the Lao situation into a large operation. He [Bohlen] agrees with Ambassador Thompson that the Soviets are not seeking a complete victory, but, at the same time, that they would not accept a complete defeat.” Soviet involvement in Laos, Bohlen continued, was “also in part a function of the Soviet-ChiCom row. Following the Communist meeting in Moscow last November, the Soviets probably have to demonstrate their Bolshevik revolutionary zeal.” For text of the memorandum of conversation, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XXIV, pages 12-18. In subsequent days Kennedy and his advisers discussed several times how they should assess Soviet intentions and “how the United States could save Laos.” See ibid., pages 26-27, 42-44, and 48-50.





8. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, January 18, 1961.

PART II

NOTES AND COMMENTS

East-West Relations

The USSR last week used propaganda charges of US harassment of Soviet merchant vessels to convey the impression that the new US administration is obligated to take unilateral measures to improve Soviet-American relations. In a press conference in Moscow on 12 January, Minister of Merchant Marine Viktor Bakayev charged that US military aircraft and ships were systematically conducting “provocative actions” against Soviet vessels.

The main purpose of the press conference and a subsequent note to the US on 14 January1 probably was to create an issue of a secondary nature which the Soviet leaders may use to differentiate between the two US administrations. Twice during his press conference Bakayev expressed hope that the “new government” of the US would denounce the actions and put an end to the “provocations of the American armed forces.” He said such a move would make a “good contribution to the improvement of Soviet-American relations.”

Bloc propaganda has also gone to some lengths on such other issues as Laos and Cuba to make clear that its criticism of the US was directed at the “outgoing Eisenhower administration” and to differentiate sharply between the present unsatisfactory state of Soviet-American relations and Moscowʼs expectations of improved relations under the new President.

The bloc has also used President Eisenhowerʼs State of the Union message2 to emphasize that improvement of Soviet-American relations will depend primarily on the attitude of the new US administration. A TASS review described the message as an attempt to “whitewash reality” and convince the new President that the present “bankrupt policy” should be continued. TASS also claimed that while the speech evoked no interest, the inaugural address of the new President was being “awaited with much interest.”

Other Soviet broadcasts asserted that the change in administrations will mean a change in the atmosphere of Soviet-US relations, and that statements by members of the new administration already “testify to their correct understanding” of important international problems. The Hungarian news service reported a press editorial which presumed that the new US administration would end the “dead-lock” in Western policy and resume East-West negotiations, “if not on the highest level at least under conditions making possible the examination of the most important international questions.”

Soviet spokesmen have privately continued to stress the need for top-level talks on disarmament, a nuclear test ban agreement, and the Berlin and German questions. The Soviet military attaché in Turkey, obviously under instructions, sought out his US counterpart and stressed the importance of an early meeting between the new President and Khrushchev and a “rapid agreement” on disarmament.

[1 paragraph (10 lines of 2-column source text) not declassified]

Bloc diplomats have also apparently inspired press reports that Khrushchev is prepared to withhold pressure for immediate East-West negotiations provided the US indicates its willingness eventually to discuss disarmament, a nuclear test ban, and the German question. A TASS correspondent in Geneva told a reliable American observer that there would be “no trouble” on Berlin “for awhile,” but that eventually the question should be settled on the basis of a free city. He implied, however, that the USSR would settle for a more limited agreement involving public renunciation of support for refugee and émigré organizations, which Moscow would represent as a step toward American recognition and acceptance of the situation in Eastern Europe.

This line is similar to that taken by East German party chief Ulbricht in a speech to his central committee meeting last month in which he listed removal of “harassing centers” and renunciation of “revanchist propaganda” as two conditions which would assure a “peaceful solution.” These minimum demands, however, were linked to some form of recognition of East Germany.

While a period of conciliatory gestures toward the US and restraint on Berlin seems to be developing, Khrushchev has at the same time sought to maintain a certain sense of urgency over Berlin. The re-emergence of the separate peace treaty threat in private talks coincides with reports from bloc sources that Khrushchev is committed to carry out this threat if he fails to obtain his objectives through negotiations. In his 6 January speech3 Khrushchev warned that the USSR was fully determined to sign a separate treaty with East Germany if the Western powers refused to recognize the “real situation” in Berlin and Germany. He gave no indication of an immediate action, but instead pledged the USSR “to continue, step by step, to bring aggressive-minded imperialists to their senses.”

Ambassador Thompson believes that since the Soviet party congress—scheduled for October—follows so soon after the German elections, it is unlikely that Khrushchev will await the outcome of these elections before forcing the issue of Berlin.

Thus, while Khrushchev appears to have disregarded his earlier deadline of April—mentioned to the West German ambassador last fall—he has in effect implied a new deadline for East-West negotiations before the West German elections this September; moreover, he has made it clear that pressure on the West may be gradually applied if his campaign for negotiations appears to be lagging.

The TASS correspondent stressed that a nuclear test ban was a more critical problem than Berlin. He hinted that when negotiations resumed, the USSR would be prepared to reach a “reasonable agreement” on the issue of the number of annual on-site inspections of areas where detection equipment indicated a possible nuclear explosion. Thus far, the Soviet delegation at Geneva has refused to negotiate the issue since proposing three inspections in theUSSR each year. The Soviets, however, have hinted that their proposal is subject to amendments, but only if the Western powers concede that the basis for determining the number of inspections will be an arbitrary political decision rather than a scientific estimate of the probable number of suspicious natural occurrences, such as earthquakes.

Thus far Soviet propaganda has not commented on American press reports of the special task force recommendation to the new President that nuclear test ban talks and disarmament negotiations be deferred for several months.

Press reports of the full text of Khrushchevʼs 6 January speech, on the results of the Moscow conference of Communist leaders, indicate that it is intended as a definitive Soviet interpretation of the doctrinal and policy questions covered in the Moscow declaration of 6 December. Publication of the full text of this speech was delayed until 17 January, in the party journal Kommunist. Publication at this time is probably intended to complement an expected Central Committee resolution on the Moscow conference.



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Top Secret; [codeword not declassified]; Noforn. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 1-3 of Part II of the issue.

1 For text of the Soviet note of January 14, see Department of State Bulletin, February 6, 1961, p. 178.

2 For text of the message, January 12, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1960-61, pp. 913-930.

3 See footnote 1, Document 13.





9. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, January 21, 1961, 4 p.m.

1706. Eyes only Secretary. Following is aide-memoire handed me by Khrushchev today. Request this be closely held pending receipt my explanatory message.

Begin text.

Soviet Government, guided by sincere desire to begin a new phase in relations between Soviet Union and US, has decided to meet wishes of American side in connection with release of two American airmen, members of crew of RB-47 reconnaissance airplane of US Air Force, F. Olmstead and D. McKone.

In considering this question Soviet Government took account above all of statements by President of US J. Kennedy during period of election campaign, which testify to fact that he did not and does not approve of reconnaissance flights of American military aircraft over (V predely) Soviet Union. We proceed from fact that new US Government, which is now led by Mr. Kennedy, will act in practice in spirit of these statements. With this there would be removed a serious obstacle to improvement of Soviet-American relations.

Soviet Government also took into account wishes for freeing of two airmen of RB-47 aircraft expressed lately to Soviet Ambassador in Washington by prominent figures of Democratic Party from closest circles of Mr. J. Kennedy who indicated that such a step of Soviet Government would be regarded by American side as a gesture of good-will and a step toward improvement of Soviet-American relations. Same opinion was expressed by US Ambassador in Moscow, Mr. Thompson.

Soviet Government hopes that this act of good-will will be correctly interpreted and appraised in corresponding fashion by US Government and that in future, actions of the kind leading to sharpening of relations between our countries, which have formerly taken place, will not be permitted.

Soviet Government expects that US Government for its part will also devote efforts to improvement of Soviet-American relations, and hopes that release of American airmen will serve cause of strengthening trust between our countries.

We should like to put an end to past and open a new page in relations between our countries. With these objectives Soviet Government is prepared to go further and not to insist on discussion at second part of 15th Session of UN General Assembly on question “concerning aggressive actions of USA.” The Soviet Government proceeds from view that, given correct understanding of this step by US Government, favorable conditions for improvement of Soviet-American relations will result. Let bad past not interfere with our joint work in name of good future.

Soviet Government would like to hope that US Government for its part will also do everything in order not to burden agenda of forthcoming second part of 15th Session of General Assembly with discussion of questions which will inevitably drag us to times of “cold war.”

It is possible that there will still be found those desirous of going on path of further mutual reproaches in relations between USSR and USA. But we do not consider that this would be a correct and reasonable path. According to our deep conviction there are every grounds for normalizing international situation and clearing away by common efforts all rubbish and all residue (Nanosnogo) which has accumulated during years of “cold war” in Soviet-American relations.

Soviet Government hopes that its effort to find common language and mutual understanding with US Government will meet with positive response from American side and personally from President Kennedy.

Improvement of relations between our countries will doubtless meet with warm approval by peoples both of Soviet Union and US, and also by all other peoples, since cause of strengthening universal peace and international security in much depends on how relations between USSR and USA develop.

End text.

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 761.5411/1-2161. Confidential; Priority.





10. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, January 21, 1961, 7 p.m.

1707. Eyes only Secretary. After offering congratulations inauguration President and hope there would be better US-Soviet relations than in past, Khrushchev had Kuznetsov read aide-memoire (text Embassy telegram 1706).1 When Kuznetsov had finished, Khrushchev said he would like to add that Soviets ready release fliers immediately, as soon as appropriate notification received from US that we were in agreement with Soviet position. He said it was still Soviet position that there was intrusion Soviet territorial waters and it was a Soviet right shoot down plane and Soviets would continue such action if further intrusions. If US agrees with Soviet aide-memoire Soviets will release fliers. If not, only logical outcome would be to organize a trial although Soviets recognize this would only lead to further exacerbation situation.

I replied that I appreciate spirit in which proposal made but at pres-ent moment old administration had gone and I as yet had no instructions from new and therefore what I said would have to be on personal basis. Of course I was prepared transmit proposal to Government but at risk seeming ungrateful wanted point out certain considerations. As Chairman knew, our position is that plane did not violate Soviet territory and we prepared submit case to international arbitration in order solve difficult situation. However, this did not change fact that we would like fliers back and I thought I could be sure President Kennedy also would like forget past and make new start, and utilize opportunity change of administration for this purpose. As I understood it however fliers would only be released if we expressed agreement Soviet point of view. Khrushchev thought I had misunderstood and had thought we were supposed to agree with Soviet version of incident. I explained this not case but pointed out there were two problems involved in his proposal. Judging from Presidentʼs statements during campaign there would appear to be little doubt about his intention not approve violations Soviet frontiers by overflights. Aide-memoire however referred to droppingUNGA agenda items, and I assumed that it meant on our side resolutions on Hungary and Tibet. I said he should realize difficult position in which he would put President if he insisted upon making bargain which involved these fliers where we thought our position right and other matters. Khrushchev made clear each side was free to maintain its point of view regarding incident and he simply asked that we not attempt exploit release of fliers against them. He intimated that upon their return they could be made to say things which would exacerbate relations. I said we had once made clear we would not do this but pointed out we had free press and there would doubtless be some publicity. With regard question exploitation Khrushchev said this was reason aide-memoire had referred to my conversation.2 He said they realized we had free press but wished point out their press also free and said if not how could they have published such thing as article referring to eleven missing airmen.3 He grinned and said “you were not slow to pounce on this” and added of course article nothing but carelessly written novel. I pointed out that of course much time had passed since my conversation to which he had referred. He acknowledged this but said frankly they had not wished release these fliers to Eisenhower administration for if they had Nixon would have exploited it during campaign. In order illustrate how I thought matter should be handled I told him of suggestion I had submitted that President make statement about overflights at his January 25 press conference and assume Soviets would release fliers. With great glee he said he had taken action first. He then went on to explain that there was no link between question of fliers and dropping agenda items. He said offer to release fliers was not subject to conditions and that aide-memoire would not be published. I said it was necessary to be clear what was expected of US. Was I to understand that if President either informed them or said publicly that he had no intention to send planes across their frontier, fliers would be released? Khrushchev said that if President were to add to such statement regarding overflights that US wanted good relations not only with Soviets but with all governments, this would be favorably received by them.

I said that at time fliers were released this would be news and it would be necessary to understand clearly what would be said to press. Khrushchev suggested we work out problem with Soviet Foreign Minister in order that we both say same thing. Unclear whether this would be joint statement or agreed position.

On agenda items he said they did not wish to start off Assembly discussions by arguing cold war matters with Stevenson. They had their own cold war agenda items but such discussion would spoil relations.

Comment: Recommend we reply accepting Soviet proposal re fliers and state that UN agenda items will be subject further discussion. Somewhat difficult define precisely what Soviet proposal is but I understand two factors involved. (1) We accept in some form their interpretation new Presidentʼs position re overflights; (2) we give at least oral assurance to endeavor not exploit release of men against them. Since President will probably have to take public position on overflight policy, it might be handled at his press conference where distinction between U-2 and RB-47 can be made clear. Anticipate difficulty reaching agreed position with Foreign Office although think they clearly understand that each side will maintain its position on facts RB-47 incident.

Other topics in separate telegrams.4

I am telling press here only that interview concerned Soviet-American relations.

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 761.5411/1-2161. Secret; Priority. On January 20 Thompson reported that Khrushchev wanted to see him the following day and asked for guidance. (Telegram 1688 from Moscow; ibid., 123 Thompson) In its reply the same day the Department of State said that in view of the timing of the meeting, Khrushchev could not expect the Ambassador to have prepared positions and suggested that Thompson go primarily to listen to what the Chairman had to say. (Telegram 1171 to Moscow; ibid.)

1 Document 9.

2 For a report on this conversation, see Foreign Relations, 1958-1960, vol. X, Part 1, pp. 547-549.

3 Khrushchev is referring to an article in Ogonek, January 15, 1961, which stated that 11 of the crew of a U.S. C-130, shot down over Soviet Armenia on September 2, 1958, were captured near Yerevan.

4 In telegram 1708, January 21, Thompson reported briefly on the Congo and Laos. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/1-2161) In telegram 1709 Thompson reported that he had asked Khrushchev whether he had read the Presidentʼs inaugural address. The Chairman replied that he had and would have the Soviet papers publish the full text, since he had seen several constructive things in it. (Ibid., 711.11-KE/1-2161)





11. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet UnionSource


Washington, January 23, 1961, 5:57 p.m.

1180. Eyes only for Ambassador. Immediately following telegram contains text of Aide-Memoire1 for delivery to Khrushchev in your discretion either directly or through Foreign Minister. You may in delivering this communication assure the Soviet Government that we have no intention of exploiting the release of the Air Force officers to the detriment of Soviet-American relations. There will inevitably be some publicity but to the extent possible we will seek to minimize undesirable aspects. We would hope that release can be arranged prior to Presidentʼs press conference scheduled for 6 pm Jan 25.2 Arrangements should be made for them to be accompanied out of the Soviet Union by Air Attaché or representative and Embassy doctor. Air Force will send separate instructions regarding specific arrangements for delivery of released officers.

A statement by President at press conference would be limited to first two sentences of Aide-Memoire. If questions asked, he would state position in second paragraph of Aide-Memoire as respects distinction between RB-47 andU-2 and non-resumption of flights of American aircraft into or over Soviet territory. Beyond this he would in response to questions reiterate hope for improved relationship along lines his inaugural address3 and message of Jan 21 to Khrushchev4 as referred to in Aide-Memoire.

While we have considered desirable to make clear in Aide-Memoire we are not prepared to seek withdrawal of specific UN items, we have no intention, as President stated in his inaugural speech of “belaboring those problems which divide us.” Clearly the nature of the debates at the resumed UN session would reflect the international atmosphere prevailing at that time. It would be our hope that this would be improved over atmosphere characterizing first phase of the current session.

We fully agree that the Aides-Memoire exchanged should not be published. On our side comment on this exchange will be limited to the Presidentʼs remarks at the press conference on the lines stated above plus announcement with factual information regarding the physical release and travel of the airmen. We hope latter can be coordinated with Soviet Govt. Report urgently.

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 761.5411/1-2361. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Kohler on January 23 and approved by Rusk. Also printed in Declassified Documents, 1977, 73B.

1 Document 12.

2 For a transcript of the Presidentʼs press conference on January 25, in which he stated that the release of the RB-47 flyers removed “a serious obstacle to improvement of Soviet-American relations,” and that American flights penetrating the air space of the Soviet Union would not be resumed, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 8-17.

3 For text of the Presidentʼs inaugural address, January 20, see ibid., pp. 1-3.

4 For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. VI, p. 3.





12. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet UnionSource


Washington, January 23, 1961, 6:56 p.m.

1181. Eyes only for Amb. Thompson. Aide-Memoire.

The United States Government is gratified by the decision of the Soviet Government to release Captain Freeman B. Olmstead and Captain John R. McKone, members of the crew of the United States Air Force RB-47 aircraft who have been detained by the Soviet authorities since July 1, 1960. The United States Government considers that this action of the Soviet Government removes a serious obstacle to improvement of Soviet-American relations.

The Soviet Government is fully aware of the United States Government views with respect to the distinction between the question of the United States Air Force RB-47 and the incident which occurred over Soviet territory on May 1, 1960, involving an American U-2 type aircraft. Flights of American aircraft penetrating the air space of the Soviet Union have been suspended since May 1960 and President Kennedy has ordered that they not be resumed.

As respects the stated willingness of the Soviet Government not to insist on discussion at the resumed Fifteenth Session of the United Nations General Assembly of the Soviet inscribed item “concerning aggressive actions of the USA,” it would not seem feasible to the United States Government to seek to remove specific items already included on the General Assembly agenda. However the United States Government believes that in so far as possible the work of the United Nations should be approached in a constructive manner and that restraint should be exercised in debating matters of difference between member states. The United States Delegation to the resumed session will approach its tasks in this spirit.

As was stated in the inaugural address of the President of the United States and reiterated in his message to the Chairman of the Council of Ministers and the Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR of January 21, the United States Government shares the hope expressed by the Soviet Government that progress can be made toward improving the relationship between the two countries and toward common efforts of both governments designed to assure a peaceful and more fruitful life for all mankind. The United States Government, for its part, will do everything within its power to promote these high purposes.

While the United States Government will naturally wish to study carefully and deliberately the broader international issues, it is prepared to proceed without delay to practical first steps in the field of relations between the United States and the USSR. In this connection, the United States suggests a prompt review through diplomatic channels of proposals presented by either side.1 The United States Government is ready, for example, at the early convenience of the Soviet Government to undertake the negotiations with regard to an air transport agreement which were postponed in July 1960. The United States Government would also be pleased to proceed expeditiously to renewed consideration of the proposal which has been previously discussed between the two governments for the establishment of a United States Consulate General at Leningrad and of a Soviet Consulate General at New York.2

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 761.5411/1-2361. Confidential; Verbatim Text. Also printed in Declassified Documents, 1977, 73C.

1 For a statement by Secretary Rusk on January 23 along similar lines, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, p. 560.

2 On January 24 Thompson reported that he had delivered the aide-memoire to Kuznetzov at 11:30 a.m. that day and had suggested that the fliers leave Moscow on January 25. (Telegram 1729 from Moscow; Department of State, Central Files, 761.5411/1-2461) In a later telegram Thompson stated that Kuznetzov had discussed the question with Khrushchev who agreed to the release on January 25 and transmitted the text of a statement that the Soviet Government would issue unilaterally the following day concerning the release. (Telegram 1735 from Moscow; ibid.; printed in Declassified Documents, 1977, 73D)





13. Airgram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, January 24, 1961.

G-504. During my conversation with Khrushchev on January 21 he expressed sympathy for difficulties I had faced in Moscow which he attributed to uneven policy U.S. Government past eight years. After his expressing his usual opinions on Eisenhower and Dulles, I said I had become convinced I had been a poor Ambassador as there was clearly wide misunderstanding on both sides, but particularly Soviet. I referred to his January 6 speech1 and said I thought major part of difficulty was that Soviets interpreted everything in terms of class struggle and saw the world only through Marxist eyes. I said Soviets seemed to think we were concerned about Communism as an economic system. This was not the case. Many Americans thought of Soviet Union in terms of worst days of Stalin whereas Soviets thought of the West as in the days of Marx. There have been changes on both sides, but their margin of error was greater. What worried the West was not economic and social organization, but concern that Soviet Union itself desired to dominate the world with Communism as means to this end. We believed every country should decide its own system and if they freely decided on Socialism or Communism that was all right, but once a country became a member of the Communist Bloc the whole power of the bloc was used to keep it Communist regardless of the wishes of the people and I cited Hungary. If this sort of thing went on, of course eventually the world would become Communist.

Khrushchev said idea Soviets desire to dominate world neither correct nor possible. He cited Soviet initiative in changing designation of Soviet Union as leader of Communist bloc. There was no leader and each party equal. I read quotation from his speech that Soviet Union would do everything to maintain unity of Socialist bloc and asked if everything included use of force. Khrushchev said this passage referred solely to ideological questions. He said Westerners were always talking about China, implying that this could be exploited against the USSR. While he said nothing further about China specifically, he said what he really meant by stating that everything must be sacrificed for bloc unity was that Communist countries must make mutual concessions in order to preserve the strength of the bloc. At this point he launched into the discussion reported mytel 1708.2 In discussing the US role as “international gendarme,” he ridiculed US fear of Communist agents implying that we looked for danger to ourselves in the wrong places. As an example he cited Western charges that Lenin was a German agent. He also mentioned Iran and said that Shah was not really afraid of a Soviet attack, but of Iraq and its example to his own people.

Khrushchev suggested consider disband all blocs and they would pull their troops out of the countries of Eastern Europe. I replied they would still have a monolithic system and I could not believe the contrary until some country which had become Communist was allowed to change its system. I said I believed the Soviet people in general supported the system here, but this was not true of most other Communist countries. Khrushchev observed that Hitler had counted on the people turning against the regime when he invaded the Soviet Union, but they had been wrong. I said that there had been serious disaffection in the early days and Molotov himself had told us of his concern about it, but Hitler had helped them out by insisting upon mistreating the population and maintaining the Germans were the master race. Khrushchev responded that Hitler was a fool and that if he had been wise he would not have been Hitler, but Stalin.

Referring to our earlier discussion, I said the Soviets misunderstood the economic system of the United States and I described the workings of our laws against monopolies and the functions of the regulatory agencies in the United States. As an example of how this system works, I cited the case of the International Business Machines Company which had been forced by the Government to make a large number of its patents available to other companies. I reminded him of his visit to one of this companyʼs factories near San Francisco.3 I said that they should operate on the basis of fact and urged that they have their people study how our system really worked. I said it had its weaknesses, but it did not justify their interpretation that everything could be explained by exploited and exploited.

Khrushchev referred to their action in widening contacts with America and observed that the system was going well, but said he thought trade should be developed and this in turn would improve political relations. He said the State Department and his friend Mr. Dillon who is now Secretary of the Treasury, were opposed to this view. He said it was the U.S. which suffered from this attitude and they were having good trade relations with the companies in West Germany, the U.K., France, and others.

I said I had never understood why they had agreed to negotiate about a lend lease settlement knowing that the position they were taking was unacceptable to us. Khrushchev merely repeated the usual Soviet arguments on this subject, but ended by saying perhaps we could freeze this question and trade in the meantime. He also reported the apparent misunderstanding which Mikoyan had of his conversation with Mr. Dillon when he asserted that Dillon had said the United States would supply credits if a lend lease agreement were reached. I said I had been present at the conversation and had heard no such statement.4

Khrushchev said there were many problems for the new administration regarding the USSR and that not everything could be done at once but we could make good beginning with main subject discussed that morning.

Several times in the conversation, which was already long, both he and I agreed not to go deeply into the subjects discussed, but he suggested that we might one day have a long talk at his dacha.

Khrushchev asked if I would remain as Ambassador. I said I had no information other than press reports and expected none for several days. He said with a smile they would gladly give me their vote but he was not sure this would be helpful. I replied I also had some doubts. I said if I did remain I assumed I would be returning to Washington before long for consultation. Khrushchev asked me to give his regards to the President, Stevenson, and others whom he had met.

Khrushchev seemed reasonably well but there were some signs that he had felt the strain of the long debates in the Central Committee Plenum.

LET



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/1-2961. Secret; Limit Distribution. Also printed in Declassified Documents, 1977, 73C.

1 For text of Khrushchevʼs speech before a meeting of Communist Party organizations, January 6, see Pravda, January 24, 1961; extracts are also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 555-558, and Documents on Disarmament, 1961, pp. 1-15. For a summary and analysis of the speech, see Document 15.

2 See footnote 4, Document 10.

3 For documentation on Khrushchevʼs visit to the United States in September 1959, see Foreign Relations, 1958-1960, vol. X, Part 1, pp. 388 ff.

4 For a memorandum of Khrushchevʼs conversation with Dillon, September 27, 1959, see ibid., pp. 470-476.





14. Editorial Note


On January 24, 1961, Charles E. Bohlen transmitted a memorandum to Secretary of State Rusk suggesting that he send a personal telegram to Ambassador Thompson to inform him that the President intended to call him back once the President and Secretary both had time to devote for serious consultations. (Department of State, Central Files, 661.00/1- 2461) The following day Rusk sent the telegram stating that the recall would be both to get Thompsonʼs advice and to demonstrate the Presidentʼs highest level of confidence in him. (Telegram 1196; ibid., 123 Thompson) On January 30 Rusk cabled further that he and the President wanted Thompson to return at his earliest convenience for 10 days to 2 weeks. (Telegram 1228; ibid.) The following day the White House announced that the Ambassador would return on or about February 8 for consultations since President Kennedy was interested in having Thompsonʼs first-hand observations and report on the situation in the Soviet Union. (Telegram 1243 to Moscow, January 31; ibid.)





15. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, January 26, 1961.

PART II

NOTES AND COMMENTS

Khrushchev Speech on Moscow Meeting of World Communist Leaders

Khrushchevʼs report on 6 January, published in the Soviet party journal Kommunist on 17 January, was intended to stand as the definitive Soviet interpretation of last Novemberʼs Moscow conference of world Communist leaders. Khrushchev vigorously reaffirmed his partyʼs position on the issues in dispute with Peiping and made it clear that the conference did not alter the views of the Soviet leadership.

Probably timed to complement the short and formal 18 January Soviet central committee resolution on the results of the conference, the speech took a more forthright position in dealing with the major questions of doctrine and policy than the often equivocal Moscow declaration of 6 December. The handling of the various issues indicates continuing areas of disagreement with Peiping and suggests that Moscow is determined to make no important concessions to the Chinese.

In effect, Khrushchev defended the validity of his foreign policy and reaffirmed that the only correct and prudent course under conditions of a nuclear stalemate is a policy of limited risks to achieve political gains. As he put it, “We always seek to direct the development of events in a way which ensures that, while defending the interests of the socialist camp, we do not provide the imperialist provocateurs with a chance to unleash a new world war.”

Exuding confidence that the trend of international events continues to run in favor of the socialist camp, Khrushchev stressed that the general strategic line and tactics of world Communism depend on correct evaluation of character of the balance of power. While reiterating the standard proposition that the bloc is the “decisive factor” in world affairs, he warned that imperialism retains “great strength”; under these circumstances, he implied, the bloc cannot undertake the extremely militant, revolutionary program advocated by Peiping. As Khrushchev put it, “To win time in the economic contest with capitalism is now the main thing.”

Against this backdrop, Khrushchev went beyond the Moscow declaration in discussing policy toward the West. He stated, “Our party considers the policy of peaceful coexistence, which has been handed down to us by Lenin, to be the general line of our foreign policy.” This statement takes on added significance in light of East German party leader Ulbrichtʼs acknowledgment that the term “general line” provoked a dispute at the Moscow conference.

The term did not appear in the final declaration, and Ulbricht indicated that the Soviet party had attempted to extract recognition from Peiping of such a bloc-wide “line” and acceptance of the discipline it would impose on Chinese policies. Thus, in effect, Khrushchev made it clear that the USSRʼs basic foreign policy would not be adjusted to accommodate the Chinese.

Khrushchev also went further than the declaration in restating Moscowʼs intention to engage the West in further high-level talks. Unlike the declaration, Khrushchev reiterated his previous judgment that some elements in the West understand the danger of war and accept the need for coexistence. Building on this premise, he extended the Moscow statement by reaffirming that “socialist states” strive for “negotiations and agreement” with capitalist countries, and seek to “develop contacts” with capitalist statesmen. Presidium member Suslov, who delivered the formal report on the conference to the Soviet central committee plenum on 18 January, elaborated on Khrushchevʼs remark and specifically pointed out that these contacts should be between heads of states and governments.

Khrushchev supported the correctness of his approach by going into some detail on the consequences of modern war. After discussing the hundreds of millions who would perish in such a war, he called for a “sober appraisal” of the consequences as a necessary element in mobilizing the struggle to prevent war.

He also reaffirmed that the USSR is ordinarily opposed to local wars because of the danger that they might expand—a risk Peiping minimizes. As for one category of local wars, however, i.e., “liberation” wars such as the Algerian rebellion—Khrushchev stated his view, in apparent agreement with Peiping, that such wars are indeed inevitable as long as imperialism exists. He pledged that the bloc will give aid to such “liberation” forces.

The speech reinforced earlier indications that Moscow will pursue a more aggressive program in all “colonial” areas—among which Khrushchev specifies Algeria, the Congo, and Laos. However, the speech evaded the question—on which the Chinese have charged Khrushchev with timidity—of whether bloc support to “liberation” forces will go so far as to risk military clashes with the West. Similarly, in distinguishing a fourth category of wars—“national uprisings” such as Castroʼs—and in stating his expectation of and favor for such uprisings, Khrushchev declared that such wars must not become wars between states, but he evaded the question of what risks the bloc will take. He was particularly careful not to categorize the Laotian situation.

Khrushchev defended at length his policy of wooing the nationalist leaders of underdeveloped countries, even at the cost of sacrificing the local Communist parties there. The Chinese have accused him of exaggerating the importance of the neutralists (e.g., Nehru, Nasir, Sukarno), and have urged less Soviet aid and more of an effort to bring these leaders down. Khrushchev seems willing to move a little faster toward making pro-Soviet “national democracies” (e.g., Cuba) of the neutral nations, but still not as fast as Peiping wishes.

As for the tactics of Communist parties in the West, Khrushchev reaffirmed a gradualist program for these parties, envisaging lengthy preparation—through “democratic” movements—for eventual revolution. The Chinese have argued that “revolutionary situations” exist today in Western Europe and should be exploited.

In the latter part of his speech, Khrushchev discussed the question of the discipline of the world Communist movement, the underlying issue in the Sino-Soviet dispute. Khrushchev insisted that the “unity” of the movement is of “foremost importance,” and he reiterated that the Soviet party recognizes the “equality” of other parties and does not regard itself as the “center” of the movement.

He followed this, however, by making clear that the Soviet party does indeed wish to be regarded as the principal party and as the spokesman for the bloc, and in effect he advised the other parties to get rid of those who sympathize more with Peiping than with Moscow. Several parties at the November conference had supported the Chinese on some issues, and many other parties were neutral or split.

Khrushchev, in conclusion, addressed himself directly to the Chinese, whom he condemned elsewhere in the speech, without naming them, for persistent “dogmatism and sectarianism.” He reminded them that Sino-Soviet “unity” is necessary to “disappoint” and confound common enemies. Here and elsewhere he indirectly admitted that the Moscow conference did not resolve Sino-Soviet differences and may actually have made them worse.

Although Khrushchev quoted liberally from the Moscow declaration as testimony to the extent of agreement reached, the US Embassy has received reports that the original version of the speech contained sharp criticism of the Chinese. Khrushchev is reported to have bitterly castigated the Chinese leaders and stated that although they were “stupid,” it was necessary to reach agreement with them.

He also reportedly presented a full review of the sharp debates between the Soviet representatives and the Chinese. He is said to have read to the meeting of party functionaries in the Kremlin the main parts of Liu Shao Chiʼs attack on Soviet policy as well as his own reply and concluded with the statement, “This is what happened—you can judge for yourselves.”

PART III

PATTERNS AND PERSPECTIVES

Khrushchev—The Soviet Public Image

Despite Khrushchevʼs clear-cut victory over a potent combination of enemies in 1957, when he carried out a sharp reorganization of the Soviet Unionʼs top political command, there have been persistent doubts about the essential strength of his authority. During the past year in particular, there was widespread speculation—touched off by a number of developments in Soviet domestic and external policy—that Khrushchevʼs power had been weakened or had at least become subject to a collective “restraint” imposed by other leaders. Even exponents of the belief that Khrushchev has taken firm title to first place in the Soviet hierarchy concede, in the words of one of them, that his authority “is not yet independent of continuous, ever-renewed successes.”

Certainly, 1960 was not a year of unqualified success for Soviet foreign and domestic policy or of unbroken calm in Kremlin politics. The juggling of the Kremlin hierarchy and the summit collapse last spring, the stresses in Sino-Soviet relations, the Soviet premierʼs tumultuous behavior at theUN General Assembly, and the ailments of Soviet agriculture may well have provided the material for political controversy within the ruling command. Nevertheless, the sum of the evidence indicates that the question of Khrushchevʼs ultimate authority is not now at issue within the Soviet Union.

The Khrushchev Cult

One element in this evidence is the public image of Khrushchev as the uniquely gifted and natural leader—an image persistently developed by his subordinates at all levels and by the hacks of Soviet propaganda. The prestige conferred on Khrushchev is in part an outgrowth of the totalitarian mechanism itself, which inexorably funnels authority to a single point. This imbedded tendency, with its roots in the Russian past, has probably been consciously abetted as a means of furthering the Soviet Unionʼs drive to expand its authority on the international scene and its competition with the Chinese Communists.

Moreover, even in the face of Khrushchevʼs expressed disapproval of adulation of leaders—possibly genuinely intended—there is probably an irresistible urge on the part of subordinates to ensure themselves a place on the leaderʼs bandwagon.

The end product, a new version of the leader cult replacing the discarded Stalin cult, must not only reflect to a fair degree the actualities of Kremlin politics but also have become by now a political factor in itself. The overwhelming impression that Khrushchev is the focal point of the Soviet state and singularly endowed to prosecute its aims is not likely to encourage attempts to limit his authority or to increase his tolerance of political obstacles.

Shape of the Khrushchev Image

The central committee session just completed provided a new, vivid demonstration for the Soviet audience of the breadth of Khrushchevʼs authority. The meeting opened with the announcement that a party congress, nominally the Soviet Unionʼs highest tribune, had been called for next October and that Khrushchev would present two major reports there, thus guaranteeing not only that he will be the dominant figure at the meeting itself but also that his name will be prominently featured in the massive pre-congress build-up.

Published reports of the proceedings at the central committee plenum were themselves a considerable addition to the leader image. They pictured Khrushchev denouncing with almost Jovian ire the managerial sins of top party figures, brushing aside their excuses but accepting their fawning compliments, and repeatedly interrupting speakers to give his own detailed prescriptions for agricultural ills. All of this earned Pravdaʼs praise as a model of the “Leninist approach” but scarcely conveyed a picture of “collective leadership” to the Soviet public.

Despite occasional semantic variations in the propaganda formulas applied to the Soviet hierarchy and reiteration of the “collective leadership” theme, the vast majority of party and government officials as well as ordinary Soviet citizens cannot but be heavily influenced by the cumulative impact of the Khrushchev cult. They are exposed to a steady daily dosage comprised of the deference paid him publicly by his lieutenants, the precedence given him on public occasions, the attention devoted to him by Soviet communications media, and by the kinds of ritualistic formulas by which he is conventionally described.

It is difficult to find a speech by an important figure in the regime without sycophantic passages or an editorial in the central press which does not cite Khrushchev as authority for one or another aspect of Soviet policy. On days when such organs as Pravda and Izvestia do not feature the text of a Khrushchev speech, their front pages are weighted down with pictures of the leader at some public function and, more and more, with the texts of mutual exchanges of praise between him and Soviet organizations or individuals who have distinguished themselves in some area of production.

The general outlines of this cult present Khrushchev to the Soviet public in several aspects: as a pre-eminent international statesman whose grasp of the common manʼs aspirations is either admired or feared by other world leaders, as the true spiritual successor of the revered Lenin, and as the dynamic but flexible architect of party and government policy. Presidium member Dmitry Polyansky attempted to span this whole spectrum at the recent central committee meeting: In the successes of the international Communist movement we must note the leading role of the Leninist central committee of our party, headed by the outstanding fighter for peace, democracy, and socialism—Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev. (Stormy applause) He has won the respect of working people all over the world by his profound knowledge of life, his bold and keen posing of problems, his ability to orient himself quickly and correctly under difficult circumstances, his wisdom, and his presence of mind.





Outstanding World Figure

The Soviet premierʼs numerous foreign excursions may not have been unmixed successes and their results have probably been discussed and assessed soberly in the Kremlinʼs inner councils, but the Soviet propaganda mill has concealed any misgivings and has invariably pictured them as resounding personal triumphs for Khrushchev and his policy of “peaceful coexistence.” Only one speech by Khrushchev in the previous four and one-half years was given greater treatment by Radio Moscow than the one he made following his return to Moscow from the summit failure. The US Embassy in Moscow reported for the same period an “extremely high volume of Soviet materials quoting, praising, or otherwise calling positive attention to Khrushchev.”

Khrushchevʼs excursion into theUN last fall was accompanied by an unprecedented outpouring of propaganda support. Before, during, and after the General Assembly session, Soviet media were inundated with reports of nationwide meetings which invariably expressed enthusiasm for Khrushchevʼs conduct, with the texts of his speeches at the UN, and with TASS dispatches picturing Khrushchevʼs dominance of the proceedings and the favorable worldwide “echo.”

This episode in Soviet diplomacy has, in the aftermath, been unremittingly described, in typical examples, as a further demonstration of “the impassioned and seething activity of N.S. KHRUSHCHEV,” of “the indefatigable herald of peace, the true Leninist, N.S. KHRUSHCHEV,” and, more broadly, as proof of “the consistent peaceful policy of the Soviet Government and the purposeful and tireless activity of the outstanding champion of peace and friendship between nations, Comrade Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev.”

On the Home Front

Although he may feel and act as though the USSRʼs world position is his primary concern, Khrushchev has at the same time given away no part of his claim to a special grasp of domestic problems. At the January central committee plenum he played to the limit the role of the stern, broadly informed overseer of agricultural affairs, and the Soviet image-makers have labored constantly to portray him as a leader of wide-ranging interests and knowledge, both profound and imaginative, but still humble and solicitous for the public welfare. The phrases “as N.S. KHRUSHCHEV has said” and “on the initiative of N.S. KHRUSHCHEV” are staples of Soviet propaganda and appear in contexts of all kinds.

The first party conference held in the newly organized virgin lands administrative territory, for example, dispatched a message of greetings to “Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev, the initiator of virgin lands reclamation who daily displays solicitude for the development of the Kazakh virgin land.”

Such tributes to Khrushchev for his part in the virgin lands and corn-planting programs, with which he is closely identified, are commonplace, but the gamut is much wider. Among other things, Khrushchev can take credit, according to presidium candidate member Korotchenko, for exercising “an enormous, beneficial influence” on Soviet literature and, according to the chairman of the State Planning Committee, for “indefatigable attention to a fuller satisfaction of the growing demand of the population for consumer goods.” Podgorny, a member of the presidium and head of the Ukrainian party, carried the matter close to its most absurd level at the opening of the Kiev subway last November: The inhabitants of Kiev know very well that Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev was the initiator of the construction of the Kiev subway, and as its construction proceeded, we always felt his attention and the assistance of the CPSU central committee and the Soviet Government.





Leninist Leadership

Khrushchevʼs carefully constructed association with the image of Lenin has become imbedded in the formulas of Soviet propaganda. References to Khrushchev as “the faithful Leninist” or as “head of the Leninist central committee” are standard. Placing the Lenin hagiology at the service of the present leadership, Soviet propaganda incessantly reiterates that this leadership exemplifies a genuinely “Leninist style,” that the “Leninist norms of party life” and “collective leadership,” ignored by Stalin, have been restored, and that the party has overcome the “cult of the leader, alien to Lenin.”

The commemoration of Leninʼs 90th anniversary in 1960 produced a flood of literature describing both his accomplishments and his personal excellence—his modesty, distaste for sycophancy, and respect for the opinions of others. The adulation heaped on Lenin had, of course, the effect of increasing what he allegedly most detested, the “cult of the leader,” and of strengthening, by association, the Khrushchev cult.

Soviet propagandists seem to feel no embarrassment in affirming the existence of “collective leadership” at the very moment when their output is increasingly focused on one man, Khrushchev, nor in setting criticism of the leader cult side by side with phrases such as “the central committee headed by N.S. KHRUSHCHEV,” “the Presidium headed by N.S. KHRUSHCHEV,” or “the central committee, the Council of Ministers, and N.S. KHRUSHCHEV personally.”

If, however, any of the party faithful should detect a contradiction, they can refer to the “dialectical” reconciliation provided by the authoritative text Fundamentals of Marxism-Leninism. The masses are the levers of history, this document declares, and “the cult of personality contradicts Marxism-Leninsm.” At the same time, it is pointed out, “the overwhelming majority of the masses of the workers are well aware that the authority and popularity of the outstanding leaders of the working class have nothing in common with the personality cult … . Without leaders who enjoy authority and who are linked up with the masses and are popular among them, there is no organized socialist movement … . The first-rate leaders of the working class, who are intimately linked with the people and who successfully conduct the struggle of the workers for their vital interests and ideals, play an outstanding role in history and deserve the peopleʼs love.”

Khrushchev no doubt considers that this description fits him very well.

Conclusion

For the past two years, Khrushchev, evidently considering the domestic front relatively secure, has been deeply immersed in pressing the USSRʼs international ambitions. Atop an underlying movement of social and ideological change, whose long-term political effects are probably only vaguely sensed in the Kremlin as elsewhere, the regimeʼs internal actions have remained centered mainly on pragmatic, economic objectives.

The failure of Soviet agriculture to measure up to expectations appears to have forced Khrushchev once again to concern himself directly with an area of policy which was once his major interest. In the interim, however, his involvement in foreign affairs and lengthy periods of rest, dictated by the state of his health, have necessarily given many of the other members of the party presidium a good share of the responsibility for the conduct of political and economic affairs at home.

With the question of the succession always in the background, these circumstances have created the ground for conflicts of ambition within the hierarchy and for more or less sudden shifts in the fortunes of key figures. Moreover there is still within the presidium, according to the best available information, some room for “give and take” on important issues and therefore an area in which Khrushchev is, to a degree, subject to influence and restraint. However, the shape of Khrushchevʼs present public image, while only part of the evidence, provides some measure of his position and suggests that his authority is neither threatened nor diminished.



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Confidential. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 1-3 of Part II of the issue(Khrushchev Speech on Moscow Meeting of World Communist Leaders) and pp. 1-5 of Part III of the issue (Khrushchev—The Soviet Public Image). Two photographs in the source text and their captions have not been printed.





16. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic and Consular PostsSource


Washington, January 27, 1961, 11:17 p.m.

1115. Joint State-USIA message. We note from news reports some Western European, and particularly British, newspapers are dealing euphorically with release RB-47 fliers as possible harbinger substantial and rapid improvement Soviet-US relations.

USIA is preparing and will transmit via Wireless File wrap-up responsible US editorial comment on release RB-47 fliers. PAOʼs should strive achieve maximum placement, particularly Western European press.

In discussing matter US officials should point out that: (1) US gratified by release, as President noted;

(2) No US concessions involved;

(3) No high level meeting mentioned nor future negotiation on any international issue discussed;

(4) Presidentʼs orders not resume penetrations Soviet airspace only continuation situation which has obtained since last May;

(5) Basic US view Olmstead-McKone release is that it belatedly rectifies wrong done by Soviets in illegally holding two airmen for seven months;

(6) US, like other countries, waiting to see how Soviet Government, which has recently stridently re-proclaimed its goal of achieving Communist world by any and all feasible means short general nuclear war (81-Party Statement of December 61 and Khrushchev speech of January 6) will translate into deeds its often-proclaimed desire for better relations.





For USRO—Distribute to other dels public-affairs guidance contained numbered paras above. (Do not distribute first two unnumbered introductory paras.)

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/1-2761. Confidential; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Davies; cleared by Kohler, Davis, McSweeney, AF, EUR/P, RA/P, and USIA; and approved by Tubby.

1 For text of this declaration, see the World Marxist Review, December 1960, vol. 3, No. 12; an extract is printed in RIIA Documents on International Affairs, 1960, New York, 1964, pp. 222 ff.





17. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, January 28, 1961, 3 p.m.

1784. There would be many advantages in informal meeting between President and Khrushchev before President in position where he could be expected to take definite positions on controversial issues. Principal one would be to enable President to convince Khrushchev of his intention not to seek solutions by force and of his willingness undertake serious negotiations. I believe Soviet policy was for a time influenced by conviction Khrushchev gained from his meeting with Eisenhower that latter man of peace. Probably only specific result such meeting would be agreement upon which issue we would tackle first, which I assume would be atomic testing.

On other hand it would be difficult and perhaps unwise to hold such meeting until President has had at least preliminary contact with our Western allies. Moreover, if Khrushchev came merely to continuation of assembly he would for his own reasons probably feel obliged to take part in discussion of current issues and although he might keep his shoes on, such intervention could scarcely be helpful. Particularly difficult would be such questions as Laos and Congo. I suspect Khrushchev realizes this and will not take initiative although position might be different if there were special session on disarmament alone.

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/1-2861. Secret; Limit Distribution.





18. Record of Secretary of State Ruskʼs Staff MeetingSource


Washington, January 30, 1961, 9:15 a.m.

[Here follows discussion of NATO and the Congo.]

3. Information Line on Soviet Union

Mr. Tubby suggested that consideration should be given to the tone of the line being used at present in VOA broadcasts to the Soviet Union. It might be that this line should be modified down somewhat. Mr. Washburn1 felt that the present line was satisfactory. It is factual and does not seem to bother the Soviets. In fact, jamming is easing in some degree.

The Secretary thought we should review the situation with regard to Soviet-US relations. We have our fliers back and we have announced that no more overflights are to take place. Otherwise, there is no real change in the situation. We should not encourage the thinking that a new dawn is rising in relations with the Soviet Union. The Secretary doubted that we should make any change in our information line toward the Soviet Union although he agreed that serious thought should be given to the problem.

The Secretary asked Mr. Bowles to look into this subject to see whether any modification in our line is desirable.

[Here follows discussion of Mexico and Laos.]

WJS



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Secretaryʼs Staff Meetings: Lot 66 D 147. Secret. Prepared by Stoessel.

1 Abbot M. Washburn, Deputy Director of the United States Information Agency.





19. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, January 30, 1961, 6 p.m.

1797. Eyes only Secretary. In non-political fields this Embassy chiefly supplier raw materials and not staffed to attempt finished intelligence estimates. Nevertheless I am becoming increasingly convinced we are grossly over estimating Soviet military strength relative to ours.

I of course am not privy to all our intelligence on this subject though I do see much of end product. It seems to me this over estimate has resulted from natural tendency our military to assess enemyʼs capabilities at maximum as may be only prudent from this point of view. Other factors have been US service competition for funds, our under estimation their capabilities in past, Soviet forceful exploitation of their achievements in atomic, missile and space technology.

I shall not attempt go into evidence that leads to my conclusion but hope have opportunity discuss this upon my return Washington. It clearly not my province attempt estimate our military needs and I am in any event convinced we must maintain strong military posture along with attempt reach practical measures reduce or eliminate armaments. From political point of view would hope we would concentrate on second-strike capability and make clear doing so.

Wish point out however our estimate Soviet military capabilities also affects our (1) estimate their intentions in political field, (2) formulation our own policies to meet our estimate of their capabilities and intentions and (3) our estimate their reactions our policies and actions.

Among other things I think re (1) that because of emphasis on danger in military field we have tended underestimate seriousness of threat in political. Re (2) I think we sometimes react in military way to Soviet political actions which in turn helps them achieve political objectives. Re (3) if Soviets as relatively weak militarily as I suspect, their reaction to SAMOS,1 attitude toward inspection, etc. would be quite different than if they are as strong as we give them credit for. (While I am convinced we should proceed with SAMOS I believe its use will require careful preparation and handling).

It may be that we need two estimates of Soviet military capabilities, one for purely military use in determining our own defense needs, and other as basis for policy determinations, particularly in political field, in which case we could be more realistic and not allow such wide margins for security reasons.

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 761.51/1-3061. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Also printed in Declassified Documents, 1977, 77E. A copy of this telegram at the Kennedy Library bears the notation, “President has seen.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR General)

1 Satellite and Missile Observation System.





20. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, February 1, 1961, 4 p.m.

1813. As new administration will apparently have to move rapidly in determining our basic policy toward Soviet Union, I have attempted select, with no pretense at originality, number of considerations which seem to me worthy of emphasis this connection. Principal question I suppose is whether we should attempt to reach accommodation with Soviet Union and resolve principal issues by negotiation in serious manner; meaning being prepared take risks in order reach agreements. While I gather from Presidentʼs and other statements that decision in affirmative has already been made, I think we should be under no illusions as to what can be accomplished within reasonable period time. I am on balance strongly in favor of making effort although there are substantial arguments against it. In brief, any other course would in my opinion cause further disunity in West, would greatly diminish our chances of influencing or winning newly-emerging and neutral countries, and would probably eventually end in war.

Soviet people ardently desire peace and friendship with US, in which they see best hope of peace and better life for themselves. Soviet Union is, however, in control of small group Communist leaders and likely remain so for long period time. It is on this leadership that I feel most qualified to speak as I have probably had more contact with these men than any non-Communist, but it is also here that I find most difficulty in reaching my own conclusions. Khrushchev is dominant personality but quite possible he could disappear from scene within next few years from natural or other causes, state health and methods operation. Fact which I believe we must constantly remind ourselves is that these men believing Communists. While true they are men who have ruthlessly fought way to power, they have almost religious faith in their beliefs and this motivates them to larger extent than generally believed. It is, of course, true that no Communist regime will consider itself entirely safe as long as there are powerful democratic, capitalist countries existing in world. It also true, however, that these men are nationalists and there is constant inner struggle between nationalism and their belief in Communism. This is part of their continuing difficulty with Chinese Communists. Their experience with Chinese Communists has made them realize, I suspect, that even all-Communist world would leave them beset with enormous problems, but I repeat they believers and will go on working toward goal of world Communism for long time to come. To fail do so would be to deny faith which justifies their position of leadership, but degree of effort and methods used are factors which our own policies can influence. Khrushchev probably most pragmatic and least dogmatic of all, but he basically as devout believer as any. He is reported once to have said something to effect that if Communism did not demonstrate its superiority and prevail throughout world, his life would have lost its meaning. Difficulty in appraising such men well expressed by Yugoslav Dedijer in article in London Times when he said “in every Communist leader there are different psychological layers which contradict each other: Original revolutionary idealism, bureaucratic attitudes developed over long Stalin phase Communist development, and finally pragmatism derived from todayʼs realities. These elements intermingled, and often reactions to particular points depend on which layer has been reached.” When Khrushchev speaks as chief of state of his desire for peaceful solutions, he quite sincere and therefore effective. (He is liked and admired by nearly all my diplomatic colleagues.) At same time he has in his speech of January 6 frankly and bluntly expressed his Communist beliefs and policies. Most discouraging aspect of East-West negotiations is that we both look at same set facts and see different things and this complicates arriving at solutions. From their visits to US, Khrushchev and some other leaders know that US is not ogre that their propaganda paints, and Khrushchev has frequently said to me that he realized it would take long time for US to come to Communism. Leadership convinced, however, that there are circles (military, Wall Street, monopolists) which are terrified by Communism as economic and social system and are disputing with forces for good in US. As they look around world they can find plenty of evidence which they can use to justify to themselves their belief in class struggle. They pose everything in these terms and do not accept that our support of rightist or reactionary governments motivated by our fear their attempt obtain world domination for power reasons, and instead see it in terms of exploiters banding together to maintain exploited in subservience.

Most hopeful aspect is that evolution which has taken place in Soviet Union is proceeding rapidly. With abolition mass terror an element of democracy has entered both party and country as whole. Soviet people have little interest in international goals Communism, and tend be pro-American.

Their view of US and rest free world distorted through years of isolation and intense propaganda, and they in general have come to accept Soviet system, although they would like change and improve it. Nevertheless they exert constant pressure toward accommodation with us. Year ago in my despatch 4121 I attempted describe some current strains within Soviet system and I would today make little change in views there expressed although others would be added. I see enormous problems ahead for Soviet leadership, but not such as should lead us to expect any breakdown in system.

I am convinced that key to Khrushchevʼs policy, which I believe supported by bulk leadership, is that he believes if he can gain period of reduction tension and hopefully some diversion resources from armaments to productive purposes and possibly even aid in form credits and technology from West, he can lead Soviet Union into era Communism and, by way of example, set most of rest of world on path toward this goal. I am impressed by constant emphasis which all Soviet leaders with whom I talk put on desirability trade (and I am sure they have in mind credits and technological aid) with US. Whether or not Khrushchev actually said to Nehru that if he could have five years peaceful coexistence he could blow us over, remark is as Italians say “bentrovato.”

Declaration Communist parties in Moscow, Khrushchevʼs January 6 speech and Suslovʼs report to CC were surprisingly frank in showing that apart from concern over possibility of war, Communists look upon their approach to West as temporary expedient. Given situation in which Soviet party found itself in relation to Eisenhower administration at time Moscow meeting ofCPʼs it had little alternative to compromise with Chinese Communist position since it could not at that time demonstrate that there was any real possibility accommodation with West. Extent to which Soviet party will be prepared modify program outlined, should détente with West become fact, is something which only time can demonstrate.

I am sure we would err if we should treat Communist threat at this time as being primarily of military nature. I believe Soviet leadership has long ago correctly appraised meaning atomic military power. They recognized major war no longer acceptable means achieving their objective. We shall, of course, have to keep our powder dry and have plenty of it, for obvious reasons.

Although non-military, Communist threat nonetheless lethal as it stands today, and we shall be obliged devise better methods meet it or we will surely lose. Communists look at everything in terms of victory and defeat and probably realize that if Communist movement loses its dynamism it would risk breaking up. Unfortunately Chinese Communists have considerably rejuvenated revolutionary posture of Soviet party. Moreover, disunity of West and our failure meet challenge presented by newly emerging countries as well as our failure deal adequately with problems of Latin America, have presented tempting prospects even to more mellowed Soviet Communists. On the other hand, even Soviet Communists have strong strain of nationalism and if he can offer hope of period tranquillity I would not exclude eventual complete break between Soviet and Chinese Communists. Great question is whether strains within Communist bloc and more importantly evolution of Soviet system will develop quickly enough to counterbalance added economic power which successful completion their 7-year plan will give them. Soviets are estimating they will over-fulfill plan by equivalent of $100 billion. While doubtless exaggeration and while much of any excess will have to be diverted to dealing with problem agriculture and to satisfy growing demands their people, even one-fourth this amount if used, for example, for foreign aid programs, subversion, propaganda, etc., evoke awesome possibilities.

This will be followed by separate telegrams on some specific foreign policy questions.

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/3-161. Secret; Limit Distribution. Also printed in Declassified Documents, 1977, 73F.

1 Dated January 29, 1960. (Department of State, Central Files, 761.00/1-2960)





21. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, February 3, 1961, 4:30-5:10 p.m.

SUBJECT

Discussion of U.S.-Soviet Relations



PARTICIPANTS

Mikhail A. Menshikov, Soviet Ambassador

Mr. Levchenko, Second Secretary, Soviet Embassy

The Secretary

Mr. McSweeney, Director,SOV



The Ambassador opened the conversation by extending congratulations to the Secretary and expressing the hope that with the installation of the new Administration the American Government and people could now find the means of improving relations between the two countries—the first steps taken by the new Administration give the Soviets and all other peoples hope that there can be concerted action between the two countries.

The Secretary said he looked forward to working with Mr. Menshikov toward improvement of relations, a matter of enormous mutual interest. He suggested it would be valuable to find means of progress on lesser but tangible questions thus providing a proper framework for consideration of more difficult questions. For example, there are the questions of an air transport agreement, establishment of consulates at Leningrad and New York, and expansion of the exchange program. While these are not the most important questions they can build a basis for mutual understanding and also assist in developing public understanding. The Secretary said he wanted to comment on the timing of the nuclear test ban negotiations—the date suggested by the United States does not constitute delay but rather the minimum time for a new Administration to review and prepare. He asked if the Ambassador had any knowledge of the Soviet Governmentʼs reaction to the suggested date of March 21.

The Ambassador said he had no word, noting that the United States approach had been made by Ambassador Thompson. He said he would remind his Government that a reply is expected.

The Secretary noted that Ambassador Thompson is returning from Moscow on consultation, and suggested that he might bring the Soviet Governmentʼs answer with him. The Secretary said Ambassador Thompson is not returning with a collection of problems acquired in Moscow but rather to consult with the new Administration in order to go back better prepared for discussion on a whole range of questions. The Secretary expressed his and the Presidentʼs utmost confidence in Ambassador Thompson.

Ambassador Menshikov said that the Secretary had not mentioned in his early remarks normalization of trade, which was one thing that the Ambassador thought would help greatly, not so much from the economic standpoint as from the standpoint of creation of a better climate. The Secretary said that the items he mentioned, i.e., air transport and consequent increased travel, would be a part of normalization of trade and referred to the fact that there are many more American tourists in the Soviet Union than Soviet tourists in the United States. Ambassador Menshikov said the Soviets buy more U.S. goods. He said that it is not Soviet policy to earn dollars—rather they are glad to spend these dollars in the United States. Soviet tourism in the U.S., he said, is increasing and there have been 1,000 this year. The Secretary mentioned the admiration of a colleague of his of the roadside tourist camps he encountered on a drive from Leningrad to the Crimea. The Ambassador said that the President of Intourist had recently said that Soviet capacity to handle tourists would be increased by 1965 by 200,000 per year. He then reverted to the question of trade normalization and problems created by U.S. restrictions. He noted that the U.S. was the only big country with which theUSSR does not have a trade agreement with most favored nation provisions. Most favored nation treatment, he said, is a sign of normalcy. The Secretary mentioned that a major element restricting trade can be the patent and copyright situation in countries with different policies. The Ambassador said that commercial contracts can take care of this situation, noting his own trade experience for many years with the Soviet Government. He said that the present trade level of 40-50 million dollars between the U.S. and the USSR is only about a tenth of what it was in 1930. He said the Soviet Government does not wish to purchase military or strategic items—indeed, he said, they could offer such items to the U.S.

Ambassador Menshikov then inquired whether the Secretary had any ideas or proposals regarding the possibility of discussion of some of the things that he had discussed earlier with the Secretary and Ambassador Bruce.1 He disclaimed that he was in any way attempting to push the administration but only wondered when, how, and where discussion of particular items could take place. He mentioned as subjects of this sort disarmament, a peaceful German settlement including West Berlin, and improvement of relations between the two countries.

The Secretary said that with regard to the last general question it is useful to find specific points on which progress can be made—big questions are made up of many little questions. Normal diplomatic means should be used to find points capable of resolution. He said that we feel disarmament to be of the utmost importance, mentioning that Mr. McCloy, who has been charged with this responsibility, is undertaking intensive work in close collaboration with the Secretary. Our priority attention first goes to the question of nuclear testing where we must have a little time for review. He suggested it might be useful at an appropriate time for Ambassador Menshikov and Mr. McCloy to discuss these matters. The disarmament question as a whole is more comprehensive and complex and probably would require a little more time than review of the testing question. He noted that it is difficult to insulate or isolate disarmament from the general situation regarding our relations. The Ambassador said that a disarmament settlement would settle most other things as well.

Ambassador Menshikov noted that the U.S. aide-memoire2 included the two points of an air transport agreement and consulates. The Secretary had also mentioned widening the scope of the exchanges. He, the Ambassador, had added the subject of trade which he considers important. Finally, the President had mentioned cooperation in the scientific field.3 The Ambassador asked if the Secretary had any idea how and when these questions might be discussed. The Secretary said he hoped to be able to work out something after Ambassador Thompson arrives. After discussion with him the U.S. might be in a position to make some suggestions.

The Secretary then asked Ambassador Menshikov, unofficially, if he thought there was any point of raising the question of lessening travel restrictions, which are now anomalous. Ambassador Menshikov said he personally favored such relaxation and said that on several occasions in the past his Government had tried to approach this matter but each time something happened in the field of foreign relations which prevented development. He said that a year ago when preparations were being made for the visit of President Eisenhower all kinds of things were developing in this direction and everyone was hopeful that steps forward, including this particular problem, could be taken. They now again hope for a radical improvement of the situation. He suggested that progress in other fields might have a good result in the field of travel restrictions. He said the restrictions were left over from the last war and noted that they applied to all foreigners, not just Americans. The Secretary said he fully understood that security of certain installations would have to be retained both in this country and the USSR. Close-in protection could be provided while the rest of the country could be open.

The Secretary expressed the hope that quiet employment of normal diplomatic channels could give both sides a better approach to larger questions. The Ambassador said that he felt an exchange of views on all questions was useful either in Washington or Moscow or both places simultaneously. He noted that Mr. Bowles yesterday had expressed the hope that in the future the two countries could go into all international forums with joint views.4 The Secretary said it is important to guarantee the success of important debates in international forums since the effect of failure is serious. The Ambassador said this was indeed the Soviet approach, i.e., through discussion in diplomatic channels to establish a common basic point of view. The Secretary said that the significance of a new Administration in Washington is that it offers an opportunity to both sides to review the situation. Such review can open the way to a common approach at least in some questions. The Secretary said that the Administration has no illusions that the problems involved are simple. The Ambassador said that with a common desire the two countries could do many things. The Secretary suggested that we need also to find a common vocabulary—we need to examine this question in a relaxed fashion. The Ambassador agreed that words have different meanings in our two societies. This is natural, he said, given the difference of our ideologies. Neither one of us will persuade the other, he said, but we can co-exist. The Secretary agreed that the important questions between the countries are not ideological—but we must be careful in the field of action and be sure we understand each other in this regard. The Ambassador said that the Soviet Union is all in favor of a quiet purposeful approach involving reasonable compromises. But this must be on an equal basis and there must be no attempt to achieve any one-sided settlement.

As the Ambassador left, the Secretary said he hoped he would see the Ambassador and Mrs. Menshikov at the Presidentʼs reception on the 8th.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/2-361. Confidential. Drafted by McSweeney and approved in S on February 12. A copy of Kohlerʼs briefing memorandum to Rusk, February 3, is ibid., 601.6111/2-361.

1 See Document 2; the conversation with Rusk has not been further identified.

2 See Document 12.

3 For text of the State of the Union address, January 30, during which the President made this suggestion, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 19-28.

4 A 3-page memorandum of Menshikovʼs conversation with Bowles on February 2, which covered the same topics as his conversation with Rusk, is in Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/2-261. Kohlerʼs briefing memorandum for this meeting is ibid., 601.6111/2-161.





22. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, February 4, 1961, 5 p.m.

1844. Eyes only Secretary. Following is text of aide-memoire handed me by Gromyko at two p.m. today:

Begin Text:

Government Soviet Union expresses satisfaction in connection with statement contained in aide-memoire of US Government of January 241 this year that US Government will do everything possible for improvement relations between USSR and USA. Government USA can be sure that all efforts in this direction will always meet with positive response and support in every possible way on part Soviet Government.

Soviet Government has taken note of announcement that President USA has issued directive prohibiting American aircraft from violating air spaceUSSR. Thus, one of reasons, which as known, led to serious deterioration Soviet-American relations, has been removed.

Soviet Government welcomes intention US Government engage in joint consideration of broad international problems, which determine state of international relations in our time. We hope that US Government informed in detail about certain views of Soviet Government on most important of these problems, which were set forth by Ambassador USSR in USA in course recent unofficial exchange of opinions. Comments and views, which might be expressed by US Government on questions touched upon in course of this exchange of opinions will be studied with full attention by Soviet Government.

Soviet Government shares point of view US Government expressed in aide-memoire that work of UN and discussions of controversial questions between member states of UN should be approached in constructive manner. Such approach especially necessary for removal of questions preventing achievement healthier international situation and fruitful work of UN.

In our opinion, preliminary exchange of views between two governments is expedient in nearest future for purpose of seeking mutually acceptable decisions on questions which are before 15th Session General Assembly UN, which, as known, will soon resume its work. Appropriate instructions could be given, for example, to our representatives in UN. Representative USSR in UN is employed undertake such an exchange of views.

Government USSR, just as US Government, is prepared to discuss practical steps in sphere Soviet-American relations and to examine concrete proposals of both sides. Soviet side, specifically, confirms its agreement to conduct negotiations for purpose concluding agreement on air communications between USSR and USA. Soviet representatives can start these negotiations in Washington or in Moscow at time which will be mutually agreed.

Soviet Government considers that in nearest future discussion of draft consular convention between USSR and USA could be started, about which exchange of opinions between parties already had begun some time ago. In this connection question of reciprocal opening of Consulates General raised in aide-memoire Government USA of January 24 of this year could also be examined. Moscow 4 February, 1961.

End text.

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/2-461. Confidential; Priority.

1 See Document 12.





23. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs (Tubby) to the Presidentʼs Press Secretary (Salinger)Source


Washington, February 6, 1961.

SUBJECT

Luncheon Discussion with TASS Correspondent1



The requirement that Soviet correspondents be finger printed if they remain more than one year in this country applies to all nonimmigrant aliens.2 It is also true that the Soviet Union does not require such finger printing of our correspondents but it does place many other impediments in their way.

The objections of Soviet correspondents to comply with this requirement was first brought to the attention of the Department of State in October 1960. In November the Department informed the Minister Consular of the Soviet Embassy (Mr. Smirnovsky) that the question would be reviewed.

For the moment the Immigration & Naturalization Service has agreed to the Soviet correspondents remaining in the United States without complying with the finger printing requirement.

For your information only, conversations were held between the Department of State and the Immigration Service on this subject as late as last week and indications are that the nonimmigrant alien finger printing requirement will be removed. If this is decided upon it requires action by the Secretary of State and the Attorney General who jointly and formally agreed to the present system. This Department does not think it would be helpful to engage Mr. Sagatelyan in a polemic inasmuch as this might have an adverse effect on American correspondents in Moscow.

American news correspondents in Moscow are subjected to rigid censorship and are subject to having their six monthsʼ residence permits unrenewed if they fail to report the news in a manner favorable to Soviet interests.

Most important, however, is the difficulty in getting American correspondents admitted to the Soviet Union. The U.S. Government has not refused a visa to any Soviet correspondent desiring to come to the United States during the past several years. In contrast the Soviet Government has failed to take positive action on the application of a reputable American news organization, Fairchild Publications, which wishes to station a permanent correspondent in Moscow. The New York Herald Tribune informed us Thursday that it was concerned because a visa had not been issued yet to Walter Lister who will replace Tom Lambert in Moscow. Lambert is leaving Moscow having finished his tour, but his dispatches have been severely criticized by the Soviet Government.

Attached is a statement prepared by our Soviet Affairs Office on the Fairchild Publicationsʼ application. Enclosed also is a memo from the Visa Office about the refusal of Mr. Shishkin, presently Chief of the TASS Office in New York City, to apply for an extension of stay as required by the law.3

It is felt that you could help by mentioning the problem of getting American correspondents into Moscow. The Department would appreciate anything that you could tell us about the results of your conversation.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 911.6261/2-661. No classification marking. Drafted by Kluckhohn (SCA).

1 Mikhail R. Sagatelyan, Washington TASS Bureau Chief.

2 On March 24 and 28 McSweeney discussed this question with Soviet Embassy representatives, stating that the fingerprinting issue was being considered, but that until a final decision was made Soviet correspondents would not be fingerprinted. (Memoranda of conversation; Department of State, Central Files, 911.6261/3-2461 and 3-2861)

3 Neither printed.





24. Editorial Note


At an interagency meeting on Cuba, February 7, 1961, Adolph Berle, Chief of the Department of Stateʼs Latin American Task Force, “indicated that he had given considerable thought to the establishment of a naval blockade of Cuba as a weapon against the Castro regime.” The Department of Defense representative, Haydn Williams, reported that “a blockade of Cuba was physically feasible” and “to be effective, would require the stopping, boarding and searching of all vessels destined to Cuba, regardless of flag.” Williams commented further that he thought “the Soviet Government would consider such treatment of its vessels as an act of war.” For text of the memorandum reporting on the meeting, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume X, pages 81-88.





25. Record of the Policy Planning Staff MeetingSource


Washington, February 8, 1961, 10:30 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

George McGhee

George Morgan

Henry Brodie

Leon Fuller

Howard Furnas

Henry Owen

George F. Kennan, Princeton

Henry Ramsey

Edward Rice

Carlton Savage

Evan Wilson

William Webb



[Here follow observations Kennan made on the work of the Policy Planning Staff.]

Mr. Kennan made the following observations on matters of substance:

There is little hope now for negotiation with the Russians on the fundamental problems such as disarmament and the division of Europe. We are likely to make more progress through reciprocal unilateral actions or tacit arrangements rather than signed agreements. This may be especially true in the disarmament field.

The US and the USSR have many points of common interest. We should endeavor to locate them and work on them. TheUSSR would welcome (1) the removal of the captive nations resolution from the Congressional calendar, and (2) strengthening commercial relations with the US, which to them would have symbolic political significance.

We should drop the problem of Hungary in relations with the USSR as it is an irritant and we cannot help the Hungarian people by continuing to press it.

It might be possible to work out informally with the USSR a mutually agreed arms limitation policy for Africa, even if this means US concessions regarding existing bases in North Africa.

Khrushchev with all his bluster is a sensitive man. We need patience and humor in dealing with him. We should not be worried by his statement that the Soviet Union intends to bury us—this was metaphorical, and the Soviet leaders know where their real interests lie.

The question of Sino-Soviet relations appears to be one for intelligence analysis rather than planning. We cannot do much to influence these relations but we must constantly observe them.

We have an identity with Russia in the Far East. Japan should not be a barrier in our relations with the USSR. It might be helpful if we agreed to withdraw our bases from Japan and made a Far East agreement with Japan and Russia. This could in turn help us deal with the Korean problem.

We have much more difficult problems with the Chinese than with the Russians. The latter have more in common with Western civilization.1

Mr. Kennan thought it would be desirable for the Department to return to the old practice of giving instructions to a newly-appointed Ambassador explaining the purposes and objectives of his mission.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Staff Minutes 1961. Confidential. Drafted by Carlton Savage.

1 In a similar discussion on February 20, Ambassador Thompson stressed that Soviet officials emphasized trade in every conversation with him. He added that U.S. willingness to make trade arrangements with the Soviet Union “would be an evidence to them of good intentions.” Thompson added that Moscow saw the Middle East as one of its greatest opportunities and he believed that their greatest problem was containment of Communist China. Thompson concluded that the best thing the United States could do to put strain on relations between China and the Soviet Union was to make progress bilaterally with the latter. (Ibid.)





26. Notes on DiscussionSource


Washington, February 11, 1961.

THE THINKING OF THE SOVIET LEADERSHIP, CABINET ROOM, FEBRUARY 11, 1961

PRESENT

The President, the Vice President, the Secretary of State, Ambassador Harriman, Ambassador Thompson, Mr. Bohlen, Mr. Kennan, Mr. Bundy



The subjects discussed can be grouped under four headings: 1. The general condition of the USSR and its government.

2. Current Soviet attitudes on foreign affairs.

3. Useful American policies and attitudes.

4. Methods of negotiation, and problem of a possible meeting between the President and Khrushchev.





1. General condition of the USSR and its government

Ambassador Thompson reported that, in a general way, the Soviet Government is strong, and Soviet economic growth a formidable fact. But agriculture is a deep problem; the government may be facing a third successive year of bad harvests.

On the industrial side, while there are still problems in the process of control and decentralization of the growing machine, prospects for continued strong growth are good, and the regime can use these resources in a showy way—as for example by constructing the largest heated swimming pool in the world. Both at home and abroad we can expect new Soviet activities as the economic base grows.

At the same time, there is a rapid growth in consumer demand. When there was almost no new housing, public pressure for more was slight, but now everyone has a friend with a new house, and “the appetite grows with eating,” especially while the apparatus of terror is left unused. In agriculture, the avoidance of terror complicates a problem already made difficult by technological backwardness: Secretary Rusk pointed out in this connection that the agricultural experts of the Rockefeller Foundation are persuaded that there are deep weaknesses in Soviet work in this area, largely as a result of the influence of Lysenko.1

But difficulties in agriculture should not obscure the growing strength of the Soviet Union as a whole, or the stability of the Khrushchev government. Khrushchevʼs personal position is strong. While the Government is a collective enterprise, it is increasingly a collective enterprise of Khrushchevʼs supporters. Only if he should face unusually grave difficulties both in agriculture and in foreign affairs would Khrushchevʼs political control be seriously threatened.

Soviet military strength is formidable. Ambassador Thompson is inclined to believe that in the area of conventional forces this strength may be somewhat exaggerated by most American estimators, but he offers no separate estimate of Soviet missile capability, and he agrees with Mr. Bohlenʼs comment that in the last five years the general Soviet posture has been made stronger and bolder by growing confidence in the Soviet military position. On the other hand, there was general agreement with Mr. Kennanʼs comment that Soviet leaders do not think in terms of a narrowly military calculus, and expect to win by the play of other forces, while their military strength protects the “forces of history” from the “imperialists.”

Khrushchevʼs own deepest desire is to gain time for the forthcoming triumphs of Soviet economic progress; for this he really wants a generally unexplosive period in foreign affairs.

2. Current Soviet attitudes on foreign affairs

While the Soviet attitude toward the world is fundamentally optimistic, Khrushchev would very much like some specific diplomatic successes in 1961. Perhaps his first hope here is that, through negotiations with the new American administration, there may be progress toward disarmament. Soviet interest in this area appears real; “we do have one common enemy—war.” While Khrushchevʼs interest in exploiting Berlin continues, he is not likely to bring this situation to a boil unless there is a breakdown of negotiations on disarmament, or perhaps an increase in tension in such a place as Laos.

After the United States, the great long-run worries of the Soviet Union are Germany and Red China. These are the countries whose relations to the atomic problem seem an important one to the Soviet Union, and indeed effective restraint of the Chinese Communists is a continuing task of the Soviet government. In this connection, Mr. Bohlen recommended—and later agreed to send over—certain documents telling the exact nature of the sharp dialogue between the Russians and the Chinese.

But if Soviet concern over Germanyʼs relation to atomic weapons is real, it is also an example of the duality of Soviet thinking: the German question is not only a real worry, but an excellent crowbar with which to pry at the seams of the Atlantic alliance. Mr. Bohlen, in particular, emphasized that nearly every Soviet argument must be appraised not only as evidence of the rational calculations of a powerful government, but also as part of a process of cynical manipulation by a group of doctrinaires profoundly committed to the advancement of their party and their ideology by every available means.

Meanwhile, around the world Soviet leaders are cheerfully taking advantage of targets of opportunity, and their recent successes in such areas as Laos, the Congo, and Cuba have made them confident, perhaps overconfident, about their prospects in such adventures. In these areas they appear to be following a policy of backing promising political leaders who are hostile to the West, whether or not they are explicitly Communist in their allegiance, in the hope that timely support of such leaders may make easier the gradual growth of Communist influence and the eventual Communist takeover; this is a change from earlier doctrinaire commitment to Communists alone.

3. Useful American policies and attitudes toward the Soviet Union

Precisely because of the double character of the Soviet behavior, American policy must be both rationally stated and evidently strong. Strength is not entirely a military matter, and, in some areas, other things are more important. In Laos, for example, allied disunity and the failure of the West to find and support an esteemed non-Communist leader have played into the hands of Communists. Moreover, while strength is essential, noisy demonstrations of strength are likely to be counter-productive, because of the high sensitivity and pride—and perhaps the inferiority complex, in some sense—of the Soviet government. On the other hand, it should not be assumed that the Soviet Union would react violently to a possible swift action against the Castro government. A quick fait accompli would probably lead to only verbal reactions. On the other hand a long civil war might well generate strong pressures upon the Soviet government to prove its greatness on behalf of an embattled ally in the great contest against imperialism. (In this connection, the experts agreed that Soviet intervention in Hungary was on an entirely different plane, resting as it did upon a deep-seated Soviet conviction that a continuation of the Hungarian revolution would have undermined the entire Communist position in Eastern Europe.) In such a case as Berlin, only strength and firmness would do.

4. Methods of negotiation and the problem of a possible meeting of the President and Mr. Khrushchev

In general, it was felt that we were on the right track in maintaining a quiet and courteous tone in direct exchanges with the Soviet government. The last months of the old administration had created blocks to communication which were now being removed by the fact of a change. While Khrushchev evidently disliked Nixon (especially because of a speech to the dentists), he had liked Eisenhower personally, without respecting him very much as a leader. But the events leading up to the Paris summit had been a great blow to his pride, and had so shaken him that further effective negotiation could not occur with the outgoing administration. He is now eager, above all other immediate desires, for an early meeting with the President, and there seemed considerable feeling among the experts that a meeting in due course, for an exchange of courtesies and the opportunity of becoming personally acquainted, might be useful. Nothing approaching a summit, in terms of serious negotiations, should be considered favorably for the present. There was a strong feeling, sharply expressed by Mr. Bohlen, that it would be unwise to have Khrushchev come to the United Nations, as a means toward any early meeting, because the Soviet leader cannot resist a rostrum, and his speeches in the UN would be unlikely to add to the sum of international good will, or Soviet-American understanding.

Thus it might well be wise to indicate quite promptly to Khrushchev that, while the President looks forward to meeting him before too much time has passed, it does not look as if a meeting in connection with the General Assembly would be possible or productive. In this same connection, Mr. Harriman suggested that the President might well say quite candidly that it would be hard to meet with Mr. Khrushchev before he has had a chance to meet and talk with the heads of the principal allied governments.

But if courtesy and a moderate tone of voice are appropriate in our first exchanges with Khrushchev, there is no reason to tolerate or leave without comment the continuing Soviet attempt to use both the high road and the low road. Savage and continuing denunciation of the United States as the principal enemy of mankind, from the highest levels of the Soviet government, is not really consistent with effective negotiation between the two great states, and this point can usefully be made. If they believe these things, what chance is there we can reach reliable agreements with each other? If they do not believe them, what use is there in our sitting down to talk with such obviously cynical opponents?

The President, in any meeting with Khrushchev, would wish to show both a willingness to negotiate reasonably and great strength and firmness. He would wish to avoid the fuzziness which made trouble for President Eisenhower in the Berlin negotiations—it never helps in negotiating with the Russians to use ambiguous words or phrases which may be taken in quite different ways by the two sides.

It was agreed that there would be no decision at present on the question of a meeting. Meanwhile communications with the Soviet Union could usefully continue, through diplomatic channels, on a variety of topics, as further examination might decree. Among the topics considered as likely for such treatment were Laos, commercial conversations, the consular convention, air transport, exchange of persons, and of course the test ban negotiations. These last may be perhaps the most important element in American-Soviet relations in the immediate future.

In Conclusion:

Ambassador Thompson, in response to a concluding question from the President, summarized the requirements upon the United States in four steps: first, and most important, we must make our own system work. Second, we must maintain the unity of the West. Third, we must find ways of placing ourselves in new and effective relations to the great forces of nationalism and anti-colonialism. Fourth, we must, in these ways and others, change our image before the world so that it becomes plain that we and not the Soviet Union stand for the future.

McGeorge Bundy2



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR. Top Secret. Drafted by Bundy on February 13.

1 Trofim P. Lysenko, Soviet agronomist and biologist whose theories were supported by Stalin.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.





27. Editorial Note


On February 13, 1961, Ambassador Thompson testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee for over 2 hours on conditions in the Soviet Union, U.S.-Soviet relations, and Soviet policy around the world. For a transcript of the proceedings, see Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Historical Series), 1961, pages 135-178.





28. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, February 14, 1961, 3 p.m.

SUBJECT

Relations with the Soviet Union



PARTICIPANTS

Sir Harold Caccia, British Ambassador

Lord Hood, Minister-Counselor, British Embassy

Mr. D.A. Greenhill, Counselor, British Embassy

Mr. T. Brimelow, Counselor, British Embassy

Mr. C.D. Wiggin, First Secretary, British Embassy

Ambassador-at-Large Averell Harriman

Ambassador David K.E. Bruce

Ambassador Llewellyn E. Thompson

Mr. Charles E. Bohlen, Special Assistant to the Secretary

Mr. Foy D. Kohler, Assistant Secretary, EUR

Mr. Richard H. Davis, Deputy Assistant Secretary, EUR

Mr. John M. McSweeney, Director, SOV

Mr. William C. Burdett, Director, BNA

Mr. John A. Armitage, SOV



Sir Harold opened the meeting with a query regarding the significance of theTASS statement,1 just received, attacking the UN Secretary General, calling for UN withdrawal from the Congo, and promising Soviet aid to Gizenga.2 Mr. Kohler remarked that this would certainly change the tactical picture in New York. Reference was made to previous Soviet behavior regarding former SYG Trygve Lie. Mr. Kohler said that in that period the Soviets had addressed their communications to the Secretariat. Sir Harold asked if the sharpness and nature of the TASS statement made it possible for us to gain anything from this “ill wind.” Mr. Kohler suggested any SC resolution on the Congo would now automatically be subjected to Soviet veto.

With regard to the subject of the present meeting, Mr. Kohler noted that there was little likelihood of any real difference regarding the subject, that we had prepared a brief paper3 which stopped short of conclusions and suggested that the meeting might usefully hear from Ambassador Thompson.

Ambassador Thompson opened by referring to Khrushchevʼs conversations with German Ambassador Kroll and the Icelandic Ambassador in which Khrushchev had said that the Soviets could not wait on the Berlin situation until after German elections. Mikoyan and Kozlov had been making equivocating noises but Khrushchev was sounding tough. Ambassador Thompson considered that a lot would depend on the international setting. If the testing talks go well and there is movement elsewhere, if the Soviets conclude that there is an effort to solve some of our problems, Khrushchev would probably go along some distance. He might agree to some type of procedural start before the elections which continued after the elections were held. On the other hand, if we seem to have locked horns at all junctures, Khrushchev would almost certainly proceed with a separate treaty with the GDR. He has somewhat of a commitment to get along with the German problem and would only withhold pressure if he can show that his policy is “getting somewhere” elsewhere.

Sir Harold said that the Soviets seemed to have designated three areas in which they wanted to get somewhere: reform of the UN, disarmament and Germany. It appears they have thrown their hat in the ring on the UN and taken a hard stand on reforming the UN completely.

Ambassador Thompson said he viewed the Soviet drive on the UN as a long-range project. Khrushchev does not seem sure how he can do it and had even vacillated some in his attitude toward the Secretary General. When Lord Hood asked if he understood that the drive on the UN was not in the same order of priority as the other two questions, Ambassador Thompson answered that was his view. Sir Harold observed that Khrushchev has already firmly joined the issue on the UN and asked if he could abandon this firm position. Ambassador Thompson said it was possible that he could, that in his opinion Khrushchev would not try to force all his proposals through the UN this year.

Ambassador Harriman asked how seriously Khrushchev would take the Lumumba4 affair. Ambassador Thompson said Khrushchev had little concern for Lumumba personally, that he had told Ambassador Thompson that he was sorry for him as a person when he was in prison but that his imprisonment actually served Soviet interests. Khrushchevʼs personal commitment is deepest of all regarding Berlin and the pressure is greatest on him here.

Sir Harold asked what other subjects than Berlin could we hope to get any movement on. Ambassador Thompson said there were divergent reports regarding Soviet intentions at the testing talks, but that he was inclined to believe that they were prepared to make substantive concessions and to get an agreement. However, it was possible that the ChiComs may have cooled them off on the testing agreement or that the Soviets may have taken the measure of the cost of the requisite inspection and concluded that it was too great.

Sir Harold observed that the Chinese Ambassador in Moscow had told British Ambassador Roberts that the ChiComs hoped a testing agreement would be reached so that they would not be forced to go ahead with the production of costly nuclear weapons.

Ambassador Thompson said the Pugwash meeting in Moscow had been interesting.5 He thought that it has encouraged the Soviets to think now that we are more serious about disarmament than they had thought before. The talks had revealed how deeply we had been exploring the problems of arms control.

Sir Harold asked for U.S. thoughts on how to spin things along and achieve a delay on Berlin. Lord Hood observed that he and Mr. Kohler had concluded the other day that we could get nothing better than a status quo and that no initiative on our part in Germany or Berlin was therefore worthwhile. Sir Harold said he understood that part of our answer was to have a serious try at achieving a testing agreement and perhaps go slow at the UN. The latter, he remarked, had now become much more difficult.

Mr. Kohler saw no good reason for us actively to seek a Berlin-Germany settlement. He said we can live with the status quo and even in NATO discussions it had been agreed that there were real dangers in a summit meeting on the single subject of Berlin. The question was what field offered the best chances of bringing about some relaxation of tension without facing a show-down on an issue like Berlin.

Ambassador Thompson offered his personal view that it was necessary to have some sort of program regarding Germany and Berlin. We must take it for granted that the Soviets will raise the subject at some time or other and we must be ready to talk about it. There was some danger that things such as Krollʼs talk with Khrushchev might lead the Soviets to believe that after the German elections they can expect to gain substantial Western concessions. However, Kroll had never given any idea of what would be changed in the German position by the elections.

Sir Harold asked what were they seeking from us and noted that this meant essentially what do the Germans have to offer? He referred to the obvious field of securing the eastern frontiers of the GDR. Ambassador Thompson remarked that it might be helpful if the Germans would proceed to establish more extensive relations with the Poles, and possibly the Czechs.

Mr. Bohlen said that there was some danger in this position of leaving Berlin on ice until after the election. The danger was that this would tend to store up a powerful head of steam for a big show-down. Ambassador Dowling would be coming back shortly and perhaps we can find out something regarding the Germansʼ thinking on discussions with the Soviets after elections. There might be something in German preparedness to recognize the Oder-Neisse line and this, of course, very closely affected German elections.

Ambassador Thompson remarked that Ambassador Kroll held some dangerous ideas, for example, regarding the possibility of a meeting to draw up the terms of a peace treaty. Ambassador Kroll might be thinking of this as a stalling tactic but it would obviously have the effect of deceiving and confusing the public in Western countries.

Sir Harold asked if there had been any private communications from the Germans to the Russians. Ambassador Thompson said that, if so, it would have been by Kroll personally. Kroll seems to aspire to be the man that changed the course of post-war history.

Mr. Kohler asked if the Oder-Neisse line is as important to the Russians as to the Poles. Ambassador Thompson thought yes. It was needed to jell the situation in Eastern Europe, and that objective was high on the Soviet list. If the western Polish borders were changed in the slightest, the Soviets felt the Poles would look for compensating changes in the East. Lord Hood asked if they were more interested in this than in getting us out of Berlin. Ambassador Thompson said yes, but that the East Germans were, of course, more interested in Berlin. However, the Soviets could hold the East Germans in line if they wished to.

Mr. Kohler referred to the correspondence in late 1957 and early 1958 regarding the lists of topics that the West and the Soviet Union might discuss at a meeting. He asked whether there were any possibilities along this line or whether the Soviets were pressing for a quick summit meeting. Ambassador Thompson said that the Soviets had been pressing us on Berlin and would continue to do so. Their line is that if we do not like their proposals, what do we suggest? Mr. Kohler observed that our previous proposals had lasted only about 10 minutes (in 1959).

Lord Hood asked if the Germans would have to be in on any discussions. Ambassador Thompson said that apparently Ulbricht6 had supported Khrushchev strongly at the November CP meeting but that we donʼt know whether Khrushchev paid any price for this support. There seemed some evidence that the Russians were not particularly happy with Ulbricht right now.

Sir Harold remarked that Lord Home had followed the advice of the British Ambassador in Moscow and referred to the harsh essence of the statement of the Communist parties and Khrushchevʼs January 6 speech. Izvestiya had reacted sharply, asking if he were the minister of the cold war.

Mr. Kohler observed that we had circulated these documents to our missions, that the Secretary and the President had both called public attention to them and their significance and that we were working on the possibility of preparing an annotated edition of the documents.

Sir Harold wondered whether the sharp Soviet response to Lord Home were not meant for the U.S. as well as the British. He noted our problem of not fooling the public while we were stringing the Russians along. How we would do the stringing along was not clear except for the field of testing. The prospect for anything in disarmament would take much longer. Should Khrushchev come to the UN, the TASS release today would make it extremely hard to imagine the UN proceeding in a restrained manner.

Ambassador Thompson said that there was the possibility of a settlement in Laos which Khrushchev could regard as some achievement. It was not clear how the Soviets were going to play the situation. They seemed disposed to let the Administration have some time to organize its approach but any successes tempted them to continue a hard line. It was hard for them to “renounce any opportunities.”

Sir Harold referred to Laos, the Congo and Cuba as three areas of progress from the Soviet point of view. Ambassador Thompson said Khrushchev may find that he does not want to push too fast toward an accommodation.

Mr. Kohler said it was doubtful that anything in the bilateral field such as exchanges would restrain the Soviets on the international front. He asked whether a series of meetings per se which would not be negotiations would have any virtue. For example, would the prospect or actuality of a meeting with the President deter them? Ambassador Thompson said from Khrushchevʼs personal point of view he would, of course, see that there were gains involved and it could have great importance to him. Mr. Kohler asked whether this would restrain him from raising concrete issues. Ambassador Thompson replied that Khrushchev would raise Berlin at any meeting.

Sir Harold said that it would not be easy for Khrushchev to come to the UNGA now. Mr. Bohlen said that New York was a bad place for a possible meeting between the President and Khrushchev. Given the nature of the issues before the UN and the chance to use the propaganda forum furnished by the UN rostrum, Khrushchev would be sure to employ it and would have to put on his Bolshevik hat in doing so.

Ambassador Thompson remarked that Khrushchev may come any way. If so, it would be better if he came at the end of the session. Sir Harold said that the U.K. Ambassador to the UN, Mr. Dean, reported some sentiment in New York for a quiet end to the current UNGA session but Sir Harold noted that this would probably mean a later special session on disarmament. Mr. Bohlen said that the Soviet proposal for the special disarmament session had never been withdrawn but had not been recently pushed.

Ambassador Thompson reported that Kosygin (Soviet First Deputy Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers) had made a point of stressing that the Soviet disarmament moves in theUN should not be dismissed as propaganda, that they were part of the serious Soviet approach to the problem. Ambassador Thompson said that this meant that they viewed their UN operations as an attempt to force us into disarmament negotiations as part of their effort to overcome what they describe as the barriers interposed by the “Pentagon” and “Wall Street” to disarmament negotiations. Mr. Bohlen added that this was true even though the current exercise itself was pure propaganda.

Sir Harold asked whether from the U.S. point of view it was easier to foresee a meeting with Khrushchev if he was brought into the U.S. by other means than a special invitation to him. Mr. Kohler asked whether it was excluded that the Soviets would issue an invitation to the President. Ambassador Thompson said it was not excluded but not likely. Mr. Bohlen said the Soviets would fear a rebuff; Mr. Kohler noted that there would undoubtedly be some feelers put out first. Ambassador Thompson said the Soviets would want to know where the U.S. stood regarding current issues, that they would have to know this before they could determine what type treatment they should give the President during a visit. He believed that any invitation in the immediate future was almost excluded.

Sir Harold stated that another awkward thing about a new UN session would be facing the Chinese representation issue again. Mr. Bohlen said that the moratorium issue had been disposed of for this session but that the representation issue could still crop up in another form.

Ambassador Thompson considered that the Soviets were likely to start pushing for a summit meeting, even though they might think we are now more seriously approaching the disarmament question. The Soviets would want to gain credit for renewal of negotiations.

Mr. Bohlen said that he might put a little less emphasis on the kudos which the Soviets anticipate from a summit meeting per se. If their desire for such a meeting were in fact deeper than he thought, it might be useful to get word to Khrushchev that he could not expect to get such a meeting if current Soviet conduct was continued.

It was generally agreed that the West should not be hastened into a meeting.

Mr. Kohler reverted to the previous remarks that it might be better for the U.S. to take the initiative rather than being forced into a meeting. He added that this would, of course, involve other allies. Mr. Thompson said that it could be very dangerous if we did not know where we wanted to go on the Berlin question. We would have to take a look at this problem with Ambassador Dowling. One maneuver might be procedural, such as convening a Foreign Ministers meeting not long before the German elections which could carry over until after the elections. This could serve as a buffer to Soviet moves. So far the Germans have not even let us know what they themselves have in mind.

Mr. Bohlen read the TASS item regarding the Congo and the Secretary General and Sir Harold observed that there was little evidence of restraint in it.

Ambassador Harriman said that from our point of view it might be better than a cool and detached statement. Mr. Kohler said even this statement doesnʼt exclude the possibility of Khrushchev coming to the UN and might even serve as a basis for coming.

Ambassador Harriman asked whether the Soviet statement meant that the Soviet Union representative would not communicate with Hammarskjold and not attend meetings at which he was present. Lord Hood and Mr. Kohler agreed that he probably would not communicate with Hammarskjold but would attend meetings at which he was present without addressing him.

Mr. Kohler said this was illustrative of the indeterminate stage our relations were now in, that the Department would want to consult further with Ambassador Thompson, particularly in preparation for the next round of talks with the British.

Mr. Bohlen said Khrushchev must realize he cannot get the votes he needs to remove the Secretary General unless he thinks that great emotions have been stirred by Lumumbaʼs death. Mr. Kohler added that the Soviets had indicated they got all they expected on the first round. Mr. Bohlen opined that they might ask for a special session to consider what they would describe as a crime against humanity.

Sir Harold attempted to sum up the discussion. We were agreed that it was useful to spin things along and that our actions in the testing negotiations and our efforts to achieve a settlement in Laos were part of the process. He asked whether it might not help to riposte in some manner. Could we not come back in the UN; might we not poll the delegations informally to see what might be done in the nature of a confidence vote for the Secretary General? Mr. Bohlen said the UNGA was not in session; could we call a session in order to put the brakes on Khrushchev? Ambassador Thompson said that we must find a way of saying convincingly that the UN cannot run away from its responsibilities in the Congo.

Sir Harold asked if there was any possibility of a response to the Venus shot. He referred to the Western actions reaffirming their unity after the Sputnik and asked if there was any way we could show Khrushchev we were doing something. Ambassador Thompson expressed his personal reservations regarding the advisability of rushing into some action in the scientific field. He had felt that we should see how the situation was developing before making more specific the Presidentʼs suggestions regarding cooperative scientific endeavors and now we had probably better look still closer. Sir Harold said that it was sometimes possible in the wake of startling actions by the Soviets to do politically what ordinarily would be unthinkable.

Mr. Brimelow asked if the toughness of the TASS statement did not make summitry itself less thinkable. Ambassador Harriman asked for Sir Haroldʼs first reaction on how we could meet the probable Soviet moves in the UN. Sir Harold said we should do something to show him that he does not have a majority behind him.

Ambassador Harriman said that Soviet support of Gizenga was now at least out in the open but that this meant that they would be unwilling to work with the Congolese government.

Sir Harold adverted to Laos and said the British thought they would have had an answer to their proposal last week but they had not yet received one.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/2-1461. Secret. Drafted by Armitage and initialed by Kohler.

1 For text of this February 14 statement, see U.N. doc. S/4704; an extract containing five Soviet demands is in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 765-766.

2 Antoine Gizenga, Acting Prime Minister of the Congo.

3 This paper has not been identified further.

4 Patrice Lumumba, former Prime Minister of the Republic of the Congo, was killed on January 17.

5 Reference is to the Conference on War in the Nuclear Age, held November-December 1960 in Moscow.

6 Walter Ulbricht, Chairman of the Socialist Unity Party of Germany.





29. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource


Washington, February 16, 1961.

SUBJECT

Air Transport Negotiations with the Soviet Government1



You will recall that Ambassador Thompson presented an aide-memoire to the Soviet Government on January 24 which indicated that the United States Government was prepared to proceed with negotiations for an air transport agreement with the U.S.S.R. On February 4, the Soviet Government accepted our proposal and suggested that negotiations begin at a mutually agreeable date. We now propose to deliver an aide-memoire to the Soviet Embassy stating that we will present a draft agreement within the next 30 days and that we suggest that negotiations be held in Washington at a mutually agreeable time once the Soviet Government has completed its examination of our draft agreement.

Negotiations for an air transport agreement with the Soviet Government were scheduled to have begun last July 18. They were postponed on July 14 at our initiative following the shooting down of the RB-47 aircraft. The original undertaking for an air transport agreement was contained in the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Exchange Agreement of January 27, 1958 and repeated in the Exchange Agreement of November 21, 1959. The United States had on several occasions since 1958 attempted to obtain Soviet agreement to an actual commencement of negotiations but only in March of last year did the Soviet Government finally make a concrete proposal. The United States accepted the Soviet proposal, and negotiations, as I have indicated, were set for July. On the eve of the negotiations, the Soviet Government presented a draft agreement, but the negotiations were postponed before we were able to submit a counterdraft.

In the general context of improving relations with the Soviet Union, we have two principal aims for an air transport agreement. The first is the safe and orderly development of direct air transportation between the two countries on the basis of reciprocal rights consistent with our national security. Secondly, we foresee an intelligence benefit as well as some advantage in demonstrating the high state of our civil aviation to the Soviet people. We would insure, of course, that any agreement contained adequate provisions for possible suspension or termination if this should subsequently be in our interests.

Pan American Airways was certificated some time ago by the Civil Aeronautics Board as the American carrier to serve the U.S.S.R. We would expect that a representative of Pan American would participate in the negotiations in an observer status. The route so far proposed by both sides has been New York-Moscow with no “beyond” rights.

If you approve, we will deliver to the Soviet Embassy an aide-memoire along the lines I have mentioned.2

Dean Rusk3



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.6194/2-1661. Secret. Drafted by Harry G. Barnes, Jr., (EUR/SOV) and cleared by Kohler and Edward A. Bolster (TRC).

1 Following approval by the President, on February 21 McSweeney gave Soviet Minister-Counselor Smirnovsky an aide-memoire proposing that negotiations for an air transport agreement begin in Washington at a mutually agreeable date. A memorandum of McSweeneyʼs conversation with Smirnovsky and a copy of the aide-memoire are ibid., 611.6194/2-2161.

2 On February 20 Kohler sent Rusk a memorandum recommending that the United States negotiate an agreement with the Soviet Union providing for consulates in New York and St. Petersburg. (Ibid., 611.61421/2-2061) Three days later the Department of State instructed the Embassy in Moscow to inform the Soviet Foreign Ministry that the United States was prepared to begin negotiations for a consular convention in Moscow at the earliest mutually agreeable date. (Telegram 1365; ibid., 611.61241/2-2361)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this stamped signature.





30. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource


Washington, February 17, 1961.

SUBJECT

Expansion of Exchanges with the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe



Your memorandum of February 81 asked for a report on exchanges with the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe and for recommendations for expanding those exchanges with the Soviet Union and Poland. An interim reply was sent to you on February 11.2

The report which you requested is attached4 and consists of four parts which are summarized below.

1. Interim Report on Implementation of U.S.-U.S.S.R. Exchanges Under November 21, 1959 Agreement. This paper reviews the implementation for 1960 of the current America-Soviet Agreement and reflects that only about 40 percent of the planned exchanges have been completed. The performance within the several categories varies for different reasons, the primary ones being Soviet interest in scientific and technical exchanges, reluctance to engage in long-term exchanges and a desire to avoid informational exchanges.

2. Exchanges with Eastern Europe and Possibilities for Expansion. This paper reviews exchanges with Eastern European countries and indicates that, except in the case of Poland, exchange activity has been strictly limited because of the unfavorable political climate in Hungary and Czechoslovakia, the cautious attitude of Rumania, and the only recent resumption of diplomatic relations with Bulgaria. Modest and gradual increases can be expected with Rumania and Bulgaria, but there is little hope for any significant change in the cases of Hungary and Czechoslovakia. The large-scale Polish program is unique because exchanges have been developed and financed primarily by private American groups, particularly the Ford and Rockerfeller Foundations. The opportunities in Poland are still large but these are limited by the attitude of the Polish Government and the available political funds.

3. Background Considerations: Expansion of Soviet Bloc Exchanges. This paper considers the basic factors involved in joining in exchange programs with the Soviet Union, notes the inherent risks and the need to negotiate firmly for equivalent advantages, but concludes that exchanges arranged and carried out imaginatively, persistently, and with adequate resources of trained personnel and funds can be responsive to and advance our long term interests.

4. Possible Increases in Exchanges Program with the Soviet Union. This paper reviews the possibilities for expansion of exchanges with the Soviet Union and suggests specific fields in which these exchanges may be increased. It also sets forth financial requirements for this expansion and recommends measures to increase the efficiency of administrative procedures.



Dean Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State,S/S-NSC Files, NSAMs: Lot 72 D 316. Official Use Only. Drafted by Siscoe.

1 Reference is toNSAM 13, which reads: “I would like to get a memorandum on our exchange of persons programs behind the Iron Curtain, particularly with Poland and Russia. What could we do to step them up?” (Ibid.) Also printed in Claflin, The President Wants To Know, p. 14.

2 Not printed. (Department of State, S/S-NSC Files, NSAMs: Lot 72 D 316)

4 Not printed.





31. Editorial Note


A meeting to discuss differing views on the best way to proceed with the paramilitary operation against Cuba was convened at the White House on February 18, 1961. According to summary notes of the meeting, CIA Deputy Director for Plans Richard Bissell outlined the status of planning and preparation, following which the group discussed how to generate support for the operation and other matters. Ambassador Bohlen expressed the view that the USSR would not react if the operation were finished quickly but might react if it dragged on. For text of the notes, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume X, page 108.





32. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, February 18, 1961, 7 p.m.

1967. Department pass Secretary Commerce. Embtel 1958.1 Following are highlights of Hammerʼs conversations with Soviet officials:2

(1) Re US prohibition crab meat imports: Both Mikoyan and Khrushchev stressed US inspection to resolve “slave labor” issue out of question but would permit Hammer or other “tourists” to visit and see for themselves no slave labor employed. Clear implication this intended as way out of impasse and that Soviets would expect “tourists” to report their findings to US Government.

(2) Mikoyan intimated he might welcome meeting with Secretary of Commerce as a step toward improved economic relations. However, both he and Khrushchev appeared reluctant to take the initiative.

(3) Khrushchev stated he had already given order to settle lend-lease debt (prior to January 1960 discussions). “Just treat us as you did the British and we will be satisfied.” He clearly stated this meant assurances that credits would be forthcoming following agreement on lend-lease debt. Mikoyan had stated that negotiations regarding credits and a trade agreement should parallel discussions for lend-lease settlement. Mikoyan also said USSR prepared to place orders for one billion dollars if credits can be arranged. Both Mikoyan and Khrushchev revealed their expectation that present US recession would be factor prompting us to seek expanded trade with USSR. They realize, however, that lend lease settlement and matters requiring legislation (credits, MFN) will take time. Mikoyan said that in any event substantial trade could be carried on with us on cash basis.

(4) Mikoyan and Ministry of Foreign Trade officials took same line saying three things need to be done to improve trade relations: (A) Soviet buyers must have assurance that contracts will be honored without interference (e.g. license revocation) by US Government.

(B) USSR must be able to sell products with minimum of restrictions (need for MFN). Agreed Soviet products must be geared more effectively to US market.

(C) Better psychological atmosphere required among US businessmen. Must want to seek Soviet trade. General attitude of US Government important this respect. Export license determinations on borderline decisions also major factor.





(5) Throughout all discussions Hammer had clear impression Soviets eager to expand trade with US. Hammer stressed in discussions that improvement in economic relations would take time. Soviet officials in all three conversations recognize this and appeared to accept as fact to which they must accommodate.

(6) Hammer suggested to Mikoyan and Khrushchev that USSR send representative selection from its art treasures to US for exhibit—particularly selections from Hermitage. Also suggested that Eleanor Roosevelt could be appointed chairman of committee to arrange undertaking and that he believed exhibition could open at National Gallery in Washington followed by exhibits other large cities. Khrushchev said this an excellent idea and asked Hammer to prepare plan for carrying it out. He said he would give orders to Zhukov to work out arrangements with Embassy Counselor for Cultural Affairs after Hammer had submitted plans. Hammer intends to prepare plan after consultation in US.

(7) Hammer stated to Soviets that he preferred no publicity and none has been observed. While general activities known to some members Embassy staff, no evidence that foreign correspondents here yet aware his visit.

(8) Hammer had intended round world trip. In light these conversations plans to return to Washington early next week for report to Secretary of Commerce and Senator Gore. Would also like to talk with Ambassador Thompson. One copy each of memos of conversation personally being carried to Washington by Hammer at his insistence. No classification marked on these copies.

(9) Embassy Economic Counselor accompanied Hammer on introductory visit to Ministry of Foreign Trade. No Embassy officer present at meetings with Mikoyan and Khrushchev.



Freers



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 032 Hammer, Armand. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution.

1 Telegram 1958, February 17, reported that Armand Hammer, President of the Occidental Petroleum Corporation, had arrived in Moscow as a private citizen, but at the request of the U.S. Secretary of Commerce was looking into the possibilities of expanding U.S.-Soviet trade. (Ibid.)

2 Memoranda of Hammerʼs conversation with V.M. Vinogradov, in the Ministry of Foreign Trade on February 14, and with Mikoyan on February 15, were transmitted as enclosures to despatch 558 from Moscow, February 17 (ibid.); a memorandum of Hammerʼs conversation with Khrushchev on February 17 was transmitted as an enclosure to despatch 563 from Moscow, February 21 (ibid.). A copy of his report on the trip to the Soviet Union is attached to a letter from Secretary of Commerce Hodges to Secretary of State Rusk, March 3. (Ibid.) For Hammerʼs own account of the background to the trip and his conversations with Soviet officials, see Hammer, pp. 312-328.





33. Editorial Note


French Ambassador Alphand met with Secretary of State Rusk on February 20, 1961, to discuss the situation in the Congo. According to a memorandum of the conversation, “Alphand said he thought we should be very tough with the Soviets and tell them frankly we would not accept a Communist regime in the Congo. He added Khrushchev anyway is not in a good logistic position vis-à-vis the Congo. The Secretary agreed and said that sometimes he thought we were over pessimistic about our own position in the Congo since the Soviets were having troubles too.” For text of the memorandum of conversation, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XX, pages 70-73.





34. Editorial Note


On February 20, 1961, Secretary of State Rusk called in Soviet Ambassador Menshikov to inform him that the United States supported the statement issued the previous day by the King of Laos insisting on his nationʼs neutrality. However, the United States did not support the Kingʼs call for an international conference to work out a settlement in Laos. Menshikov replied that the Soviet Union supported Laotian neutrality, as it had since the 1954 Geneva Conference. For text of the memorandum of conversation, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XXIV, pages 56-58.

On February 21 the United States Intelligence Board approved Special National Intelligence Estimate 58-61: “Probable Communist Reactions to Certain U.S. Courses of Action with Respect to Laos.” According to a brief of the SNIE, it expressed the Boardʼs judgment that “except possibly in the case of more extreme U.S. military measures, we believe that Soviet leaders would not match U.S.-sponsored military actions in Laos with corresponding, step-by-step, Bloc military measures. Except in the case of the most modest U.S. military measures Bloc leaders would almost certainly expect that most of world opinion would be sharply critical of the U.S., and that this fact would deter the U.S. from pressing too far.” For text, see ibid., pages 59-61.

On February 28 Menshikov informed Rusk that the Soviet Government believed that the 1954 Geneva Accords were not adequate to resolve the present situation in Laos and therefore supported the call by Prince Sihanouk for an international conference to strengthen the International Control Commission created in the 1954 agreement. For text of the memorandum of Menshikovʼs conversation with Rusk, see ibid., pages 63-66.

In telegram 2138 to the Department of State from Moscow, March 10, Ambassador Thompson reported on a meeting with Chairman Khrushchev on Laos, during which Khrushchev said theUSSR shared “the same desire as you, namely to end fighting which only sheds blood, gives neither you nor us anything, and hurts relations between us.” Khrushchev welcomed “a Laos that pursues neutral policy on model of Austria” and suggested that Rusk and Gromyko meet to discuss the matter. For text of the telegram, see ibid., pages 80-82.

In telegram 2139 to the Department of State from Moscow, March 10, Thompson reported that Khrushchev seemed convinced that the United States was “genuinely seeking” neutrality for Laos and was “intrigued by the possibility” of settling the problem. (Ibid., page 82, footnote 3) Nevertheless, a Rusk-Gromyko meeting in New York on March 18 produced little. Rusk found Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko “completely elusive,” according to a memorandum of the conversation. Gromyko refused to give substantive answers beyond a repeated insistence that discussions on Laos must begin with an international conference. (Ibid., page 93, source note)





35. Editorial Note


In a letter to Chairman Khrushchev, February 22, 1961, President Kennedy expressed the hope that “it will be possible, before too long, for us to meet personally for an informal exchange of views” and indicated that he had asked Ambassador Thompson to pursue the question of a meeting. For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VI, pages 5-7. Khrushchevʼs reaction to Kennedyʼs proposal is described in Documents 41 and 42. In a May 12 letter to Kennedy, Khrushchev accepted the U.S. proposal for a meeting in Vienna on June 3-4 and reviewed some of the international problems requiring solutions. For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VI, pages 18-21.





36. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, February 24, 1961.

SUBJECT

Luncheon with Ambassador Menshikov



PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Menshikov

Mr. M.N. Smirnovsky, Minister Counselor, Soviet Embassy

Mr. Charles E. Bohlen, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State



While the conversation ranged, as it had in the past, over many subjects, it was clear that the chief purpose of the invitation to lunch was to endeavor to find out exactly what “instructions” Ambassador Thompson was taking back to Moscow, with particular emphasis on disarmament and the question of “normalization” of trade. I explained to Menshikov that Thompsonʼs consultations here had been of an exploratory and background nature and that it was too soon for any specific or concrete proposals to be made on these two or other subjects; that Mr. McCloy was working on an examination of the entire disarmament picture, but it would be some time before definite conclusions could be reached.

On trade, I told him that the Soviets must understand that under our system of separation of powers, the President could not direct Congress and tell it what to do, (this is an old subject of discussion with Menshikov) and that in regard to trade, most of the limitations were embodied in legislation which would require new laws to change, and that the Congressional reaction to effecting such change was at best problematic in the absence of some indication that there was to be an improvement in relations.

I referred, in this connection, to the abortive attempt last year to settle the lend lease problem as a first step in a program of removing such limitations. Menshikov on this point adhered to the previous position that there could be no discussion of lend lease settlement unless accompanied, simultaneously, with negotiations for the removal of limitations and the granting of credits.1 At the conclusion of this part of the discussion, Menshikov said that it would appear that the United States position had not changed, and that he “did not envy Mr. Thompson if this was all he would have to say on this subject.” I told him it would be a mistake to regard any previous position as that necessarily of the new Administration, but that the objective factors which I had outlined were still there to be dealt with.

The following is a brief outline of the other subjects covered: 1. Laos. Menshikov repeated that he had told you that our proposal on Laos was “one-sided” and did not take into consideration the attitude of “the other side.”2 I told him that President Kennedy had said, in his Inaugural speech, we should concentrate on those areas where we might be able to concentrate on those elements in which we seem to have a common view as against belaboring those which divided us, and in this situation we had one point in common; namely, the desirability of the neutralization of Laos, and that an exchange of views which Thompson was authorized to have as to how this principle could be given effect in the mutually acceptable manner would be worthwhile. Menshikov agreed but kept returning to his thesis of the “one-sided” nature of our suggestion.

During the discussion, Smirnovsky made an interesting remark in which he said, “How could Laos be neutral without the inclusion of some communists in the Government?” I pointed out that by definition, any communist-controlled or influenced government could not be neutral, unless I had misread all of the statements that had recently come out on the aims of the communist move. He seemed to realize that he had made a mistake and rather lamely referred to the presence of communists in the Italian and French Governments at the end of the war. (I believe this inadvertent remark by Smirnovsky reveals where the main problem will lie in regard to any future Laotian Government.

Menshikov said he had been informed by you of our opposition to the idea of a conference and could not see why we were opposed to it. I told him that it appeared to us to be a mechanism for the exacerbation of the situation in Laos rather than a practical method of handling it.



2. Germany and Berlin. Menshikov asked me if Thompson would raise the question of Berlin, to which I replied that since they, and not we, were seeking a change in the present circumstances, this was not a question we would raise. He then asked what Thompsonʼs view would be in the event that Khrushchev raised it. I told him that beyond the very obvious elements of the United States position, which would not be subject to change, Thompson had no specific instructions. These elements, as I saw them, were: (a) We were not prepared to accept anything in regard to West Berlin which would derogate or impair the position of the Western Powers in that city which was ours by right, reinforced by agreement.

(b) The Soviet Union should understand that it would not be possible for the United States or its allies to accept a political or diplomatic defeat over Berlin, and

(c) Finally, that, of course, Thompson would report, confidentially, whatever views Mr. Khrushchev chose to give him.





I added, on my own, that I thought the whole situation in Germany was abnormal, including Berlin as a city, and that you could not claim one part alone—West Berlin—as abnormal, to be dealt with in isolation; adding that, personally, I could not see why the existing situation in Berlin could not be left alone even if the Soviet Union felt it essential to make some arrangement of a peace treaty nature with East Germany, which, of course, we would not approve or recognize but this was essentially their business. Menshikov did not pursue the subject of Berlin further.



3. On the Congo. Menshikov raised, himself, their attitude toward Hammarskjold, saying that here we had a profound and deep difference—with which I agreed. He said he could well understand our support of Hammarskjold since he was “our man,” to which I replied it was difficult to see how any individual could have been more objective and neutral than Hammarskjold, and that the Soviet denial of the possibility of a genuinely objective or neutral figure in an international position was an extremely serious one which would have an effect on any form of control of inspection in the disarmament field or nuclear test bans and one to which I did not see much of an answer if they persisted in this attitude.

4. Test Negotiation. Menshikov agreed that the nuclear tests negotiations might afford the first real opportunity to agree on something, but did not go into any detail of the unresolved issue except to state that too many on-site inspections would be a reflection of suspicion and distrust, which would be a bad thing. I told him that on the contrary, that if we were to be realistic and serious, that an excess of assurance for verifying the mutual observance of such an agreement was infinitely preferable to inadequate assurance, pointing out, in this connection, that any agreement would have to attain the support of Congress if it were to be adopted by this Government.





In general, the conversation followed along the standard lines of previous talks I have had with Menshikov, with the exception of his intense interest in finding out whether Thompson was taking back something “concrete” in the way of propositions. He seemed to be disappointed when I told him that Thompson would have no new proposals but was thoroughly familiar with the Presidentʼs thinking on the general subject of our relations with the Soviet Union and that the possibility to avoid unnecessary misunderstanding through exchange of views of a quiet, unpublicized nature would be a great step forward. It would seem clear from this that Menshikov, at least, rather expected that Thompson would go back with some startling new proposals in some form or other following his consultations here.

The subject of any meeting between Khrushchev and the President was not raised by Menshikov at any time and I, of course, did not do so.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/2-2461. Confidential. Drafted and initialed by Bohlen.

1 On February 22 Menshikov had made the same points in a dinner conversation with Secretary of Commerce Hodges (memorandum of conversation, February 23; ibid., 611.61/2-2361) and a letter to Rusk, February 24 (ibid., 601.6111/2-2461).

2 See Document 34.





37. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource


Washington, February 26, 1961.

SUBJECT

Soviet Crab Meat



You will recall our discussion on February 21, concerning the prohibition against the importation of Soviet crab meat.1 It is my recommendation that the ban against imported Soviet crab meat be lifted, and I am advised that Mr. Dillon concurs in this recommendation.

We believe that it is of great importance at this juncture to take some action which would further our objectives of developing the channels of communication with the Soviets. Removal of the ban on the importation of Soviet crab meat would be a tangible demonstration of our desire to improve United States-Soviet relations. It would remove a barrier to United States-Soviet trade which Soviet leaders apparently regard as particularly discriminatory and which was imposed at a time of considerable political tension.

The ban on the importation of Soviet crab meat was imposed at the time of the Korean War in 1951 by the Department of the Treasury in conformity with the provisions of Section 307 of the Tariff Act of 1930, on the basis of its finding that Soviet crab meat was produced by convict, forced and indentured labor. The finding was based on eye-witness affidavits, mostly from former Japanese prisoners of war, regarding the employment in Soviet crab meat canning and crab fishing of Japanese prisoners of war, Japanese civilians trapped in areas occupied by Soviet forces at the end of World War II, Korean civilians, and Russian convict labor.

In the last few years various Soviet officials have denied that slave or convict labor conditions exist in the Soviet crab meat industry. These include Soviet Deputy Premier Mikoyan and Deputy Foreign Trade Minister Kuzmin. Other information which has come to the attention of the Departments of State and Treasury bears this out. In the Departmentʼs opinion these statements should be sufficient, in the absence of any recent evidence to the contrary, to justify a lifting of the crab meat prohibition. It is our understanding that the Department of the Treasury is also convinced of the justification for removing the prohibition.

Under these circumstances, I am convinced that a lifting of the crab meat ban at this time would be in the national interest.

Dean Rusk2



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 411.616/2-2661. Confidential. No drafting information appears on the source text.

1 Presumably at the meeting during which the Presidentʼs February 22 message to Khrushchev was drafted; see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. VI, pp. 5-6.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this stamped signature.





38. Editorial Note


On February 27, 1961, Walter J. Stoessel, Director of the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State, sent to the White House for clearance the drafts of four telegrams to Ambassador Thompson. The four cables were approved the following day and transmitted to Moscow late on February 28. In the first, telegram 1401, the Department of State reiterated the points that Bohlen had made to Ambassador Menshikov on February 14 concerning expansion of trade between the United States and the Soviet Union. (Department of State, Central Files, 411.6141/2-2861) Telegram 1402 outlined the U.S. position on Germany and Berlin, stating that the “central difficulty is of course continued division of Germany” and that the “United States continues to believe that there will be no real settlement of this problem or any real tranquillity in Central Europe until Germans were permitted to unite themselves. This will remain our constant aim and we would not be disposed to take any legal or other definitive steps which would appear to perpetuate or legalize this division.” For text of telegram 1402, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XIV, pages 16-18. Telegram 1403, which outlined the U.S. position on the Congo, is included in the microfiche supplement for volume XX. (Department of State, Central Files, 770G.00/ 2-2861) The final telegram, 1404, instructed Thompson to inform Khrushchev that the President intended to make a vigorous effort to reach an agreement on the cessation of nuclear testing. (Ibid., 397.5611-GE/2-2861)

Following the despatch of these telegrams, the Department of State sent Ambassador Thompson two additional cables, 1405 and 1406, drafted on February 28. In the first Thompson was authorized to deliver the Presidentʼs message (see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VI, pages 5-6) to Gromyko if circumstances warranted, although the Department preferred delivery to Khrushchev. (Department of State, Central Files, 600.0012/2-2861) The second elaborated on the Presidentʼs desire to reach an agreement on disarmament. (Ibid., 600.0012/2-2861)

On March 2 following a discussion of how to proceed on disarmament, Thompson reported that he had explored with the protocol section of the Foreign Ministry the possibility of meeting Khrushchev outside Moscow. (Telegram 2050 from Moscow; ibid., 600.0012/3-261) The following day he reported that Khrushchev would see him at Novosibirsk on March 9. (Telegram 2065 from Moscow; ibid., 123 Thompson)





39. Circular Airgram From the Department of State to the Embassy in FranceSource


Washington, March 3, 1961, 10:16 p.m.

G-768. Following is guidance requested Topol [Polto] 1059 (also Topol G-1306)1 concerning approach by Hooper on clarifying US position civil aviation relations with Sovbloc. Department regrets delay in reply which resulted from fluid situation concerning negotiations and other aspects Sovbloc air activities.

Department appreciates problem of apparent discrepancy in having US suggest to USSR commencement bilateral air transport negotiations and US attitude in POLAD on Sovbloc operations into Middle East and Cuba. Your reply to the effect that key factor was that of areas which Communists seeking penetrate is quite right. Sovbloc air service penetration of Near East is accomplished fact and US would seek keep extension of penetration to manageable proportions and in framework orderly development international civil aviation. In particular problem of keeping ICAO members like Poland and Czechoslovakia out of such areas realized. Czecho now flies to the Far East by way of Near East, South, and Southeast Asia. Likewise Czecho flies deep into Africa.

As to Latin America, the United States wants make serious effort keep all Sovbloc airlines out of area. In particular we can not tolerate their using United States Air Force Bases abroad or civil airports in the United States for purpose carrying out these operations. It is quite clear basic purpose such operations is political and not commercial and therefore not consistent with Chicago Convention2 which specifically prohibits misuse civil aviation for other purposes. Would be inconceivable think of Czechoslovak airline having flown to Cuba under any regime before Castro. Such service just would not make economic sense.

As far as Soviet service Iceland is concerned, except for the presence of US defense forces at Keflavik, situation would be similar other Western European countries to which Sovbloc airlines now fly. However, the military operations at Keflavik do provide additional element. The US would hope, for that reason, and in view common NATO interest those military operations, that any rights given by Iceland would eliminate the possibility of 1. having Soviet personnel stationed at Keflavik, 2. having direct rapid electrical communication between Keflavik and Moscow. In addition, if either traffic or transit rights are granted in Iceland, for general political reasons, the US would also hope that rights would terminate at Keflavik or, if they went beyond, would not be granted until terminal rights had been granted by other non-sensitive countries and that such rights be carefully restricted only to specified terminal points. This for purpose preventing Soviet long-range aircraft flying from Keflavik to Latin America.

US desires conclude satisfactory air transport agreement with USSR because it feels that, in view of services between Moscow and most European capitals, it is logical for Moscow have such connections with New York. We realize dangers and problems involved and are making every effort avoid such dangers and minimize problems.3

It is not intention of the United States to in any way urge any country which must provide overflight rights or intermediate landing rights for Aeroflot in connection with an eventual US/USSR agreement to do so only in framework of the common policy i.e. to exact from the USSR adequate reciprocal rights.

Your statement contained Topol 1059 that US would not let Soviet airline fly Moscow-New York-Havana is completely correct. US will make sure there is no possibility of rights beyond New York and for that reason will not request rights beyond Moscow. Also, intermediate points will be carefully spelled out so that sensitive points like Havana could not be used as an intermediate point.

Dept agrees with other points raised by you as needing clarification for example your point number 1. that air transport agreement should be drafted so as permit consultation with NATO members before establishing air routes which will in effect call for intermediate stops whether traffic or non-traffic in territory other members or fanning out “points beyond” rights to areas which now are or in the future might be sensitive is an excellent one. As matter of fact we interpret 1958 common policy as requiring such consultation and were therefore disturbed to see the United Kingdom had revised its agreement with USSR so as make intermediate points unlimited, without consultations with the US or other NATO members. It is true that airlines of member countries may wish seek maximum air services. However in any agreement with USSR, Aeroflot is bound get at least equal rights in a market which can not possibly be of more than limited value for some time to come. For that reason political aspects appear over-riding. We are also aware that a number of countries are not really interested in reciprocal services and will not insist on operating them at the same time that the Soviets begin service. Presumably such soft attitude results from the desire to trade with bloc or other interest not particularly related to civil aviation.

Your second point, to effect that transit right problem complicated not only by Two Freedoms Agreement4 but by difficulty justifying refusal transit rights in light relations not only with communists but with other states, presumably refers to fact that state granting terminal right might be irked if it could not exercise its reciprocal rights if another member country denied essential transit rights. However US feels that countries granting such rights should take a hardheaded attitude towards Soviet Union and we have, for example, once again informed Sweden we would not any way expect that country grant overflight or technical transit or traffic rights to USSR for purpose flying to New York, without exacting from USSR adequate reciprocal benefit. We would take same attitude toward other countries as well.

It is hoped that above will be some help. Actually you have done excellent job of carrying the ball this difficult subject and Department will attempt keep you continuously informed on developments so you may always be prepared interpret U.S. intentions.

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.6194/3-361. Confidential. Drafted by Stoffel (TRC/AV) on March 2 and cleared by TRC, SOV,RA, and EE. Also sent to the NATO capitals and Moscow, Prague, and Stockholm.

1 Polto 1059, February 3, reported that Acting NATO Secretary-General Hooper had asked for clarification of the U.S. position on civil aviation relations with the Soviet Union. (Ibid., 611.6194/2-361) Polto (also incorrectly cited as Topol) G-1306, February 24, reported that the British representative had given an account of Czech and Cuban efforts to obtain landing rights in the United Kingdom. (Ibid., 941.7249/2-2461)

2 For text of the Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation, December 7, 1944, see 61 Stat. 1180.

3 At this point in the source text the following sentence was deleted before transmission: “The draft agreement which US is putting together will be a tough one which Soviet Union will have difficulty accepting.”

4 Presumably a reference to the International Air Services Transit Agreement, December 7, 1944 (59 Stat. 1693).





40. Editorial Note


On March 8, 1961, John McCloy, President Kennedyʼs Adviser on Disarmament, forwarded a memorandum to Kennedy in which he contended that it was “in the overall interest of the national security of the United States to make a renewed and vigorous attempt to negotiate a test ban agreement along the lines now contemplated.” Such an agreement, McCloy stated, “would be a significant step in the field of arms control” and “might well contribute to better and more stable relations between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R.” It could also “be helpful in preventing the spread of nuclear weapons capabilities among other countries.” Finally, a workable test ban agreement would “gain credit for the United States in responsible world opinion,” whereas “the damage to the stature of the U.S. in world affairs and the effect on U.S.-U.S.S.R. relations which might result if the U.S. were to fail to take reasonable steps necessary to reach a satisfactory test ban agreement, and then resume testing, would be serious.” For text of the memorandum, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 14-17.

The Geneva Conference on the Discontinuance of Nuclear Weapon Tests reconvened on March 21. For text of the opening statement by the head of the U.S. delegation, Arthur Dean, see Documents on Disarmament, 1961, pages 55-65.





41. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, March 10, 1961, 10 a.m.

2135. Eyes only Secretary. I met Khrushchev at 12 pm March 9 at guest house outside Novosibirsk for talks lasting nearly three hours.

I began by giving him Presidentʼs letter1 and translation, which he read carefully. He asked me thank President for his message and said they appreciated and agreed with spirit of letter; it could serve as good beginning. He asked me convey his gratitude and good wishes to President and added he refrained from traditional wish of long life for President because he being so young did not need such wishes.

I explained Macmillan would be in Washington April 4 and Adenauer April 12 and President planned see De Gaulle in Paris after that, but could not suggest exact time for meeting with Khrushchev. I said President had in mind first week in May and was thinking of either Vienna or Stockholm as convenient place to meet.

Khrushchev replied would be necessary work out reason for meeting. He seemed inclined prefer Vienna but did not rule out Stockholm and thought sometime during first ten days May be suitable date.

I replied exact time would depend on date Presidentʼs meeting with de Gaulle in order avoid flying twice over Atlantic. Khrushchev said he knew well transatlantic flights. I said President will be in touch with him further on this matter.

Khrushchev said it would be necessary study Presidentʼs letter but he inclined agree with proposal and thought would be useful become acquainted with President. He said he had pleasure of meeting President when he member Senate Foreign Relations Committee but had exchanged only few words with him.

Later at luncheon Khrushchev said he hoped it would become possible to issue invitation for President visit Soviet Union. He said they would receive him with all their traditional hospitality; they would like welcome him and his family and show him their country but time not now ripe for this.

I told Khrushchev that for present we would consider Presidentʼs message confidential and he agreed. Comment and report on subjects discussed in septels.2

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/3-1061. Secret; Priority.

1 For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. VI, pp. 5-6.

2 Telegram 2136 is printed as Document 42. Telegram 2138, which reported on Laos, is excerpted in Document 34 and printed in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XXIV, pp. 80-82. Telegram 2139, which transmitted Thompsonʼs impressions of the discussion on Laos, is in Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/3-1061. Telegram 2145 reported on the Congo. During the discussion Khrushchev expressed strong opposition to the UN role in the Congo, stating that the “UN has been used to oppress peoples and help colonialists retain colonies” and that the “USSR cannot support organization which assists colonialists, who are not only Belgians but also those who oppose struggle for liberation.” Replying that “we were not always satisfied with UN decisions either but for different reasons,” Thompson stated that “we thought it wise to keep cold war out of Africa.” For text of telegram 2145, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XX, pp. 99-101.

Telegram 2146 is printed as Document 43. In telegram 2147 Thompson reported that, regarding Germany and Berlin, Khrushchev said the USSR “did not want to change anything in Germany, but to fix juridically what had happened after the war. He said to leave the situation as is would cause instability and encourage German revanchists.” Khrushchev commented further that “to conceive of unified Germany under either Adenauer or Ulbricht would be unrealistic.” Therefore “let us conclude a treaty with two Germanies; we are ready to stipulate with US a provision of whatever is necessary for people of West Berlin to have political system of their own choice.” For text of telegram 2147, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XIV, pp. 18-20.





42. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, March 10, 1961, 11 a.m.

2136. Eyes only Secretary. I had assumed Khrushchevʼs reference to need find reason for his meeting with President was motivated by need for explanation to ChiComs.1 In plane returning Moscow however I queried Dobrynin re meaning Khrushchevʼs remark and he replied he thought Khrushchev had in mind merely what kind statement would be made to press. He thought my remark to him that meeting would be presented simply as opportunity two statesmen get acquainted and review problems of mutual interest would cover matter but pointed out this was not fully made clear in letter.

Khrushchev obviously pleased with Presidentʼs initiative and believe it moderated position he took on various problems discussed.

He appeared extremely tired and his appearance shocked even Soviets who accompanied me. He said he was leaving today for Aklominsk and would go from there to Alma Ata returning Moscow about March 23 or 24. When I inquired when party program for October Congress would be published he replied in August or possibly earlier. He said he planned go Central Asia in early April for rest and work on program. He pointed out too early go Black Sea. He took pills during lunch and drank only small amount red wine. During lunch in addition usual toast to President, etc. he remarked President had asked him use diplomatic channel and he wished propose toast to this method getting some results.

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/3-1061. Secret.

1 See paragraph 3, Document 41.





43. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, March 10, 1961, 5 p.m.

2146. Trade. I told Khrushchev we have been reviewing restrictions on import of Soviet crabmeat and hoped be able lift them. I said I realized this would be small step but I believed it was in right direction. I said we did not want to say anything publicly for present.1 To my surprise Khrushchev displayed considerable satisfaction and agreed this would be good move. He said we must normalize our relations and that it is difficult to explain why USSR has little commerce with US when it trades with other Western powers. He brought up recent cancellation of grinding machines and said USSR can fly its rockets without US machines. (On return trip Dobrynin told me Hammer2 had told Khrushchev they would soon receive good news about an export license without specifying what it was for. Soviets had assumed it was for grinding machines and had therefore been particularly surprised at cancellation.) I gave Khrushchev confidential explanation this transaction and little lecture on how American Govt operates. I told him I had discussed with Secretary Hodges importance of maintaining license once it had been issued and that he had agreed this was important.

Khrushchev expressed opinion that small minority in US is blinded by hatred for USSR and expressed regret because their attitude does not create conditions for trust. He also raised question of purchase of urea factories and said if US would sell them USSR ready to buy them. He said USSR had already purchased three from Netherlands. He saidUSSR had lived 200 years without such factories and could live a few years more. Later at luncheon he said USSR does not compete with US in trade field and could be very good consumer of its goods. If we had different trade relations, he said, they would not have been developing some branches of their industry and instead would be buying from us.

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 411.6141/3-1061. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution.

1 On March 20 the Department of the Treasury announced that it was lifting the ban on the importation of Soviet crab meat.

2 See Document 32.





44. Airgram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, March 14, 1961.

G-665. The following miscellaneous items supplement reports on my recent conversation with Khrushchev. Most of these points arose during informal luncheon conversation.

(1) During luncheon I mentioned to Khrushchev that one area for cooperation between the US andUSSR would be Outer Space. Khrushchev replied that he agreed, but he did not pursue the subject.

(2) Khrushchev said that he had received many letters from statesmen abroad and that these emphasized that much depended upon Soviet relations with the US.

(3) Khrushchev recalled his recent conversation with Mr. Hammer and repeated much of what the Embassy has already reported; namely, that Hammer was the first foreign concessionaire in the Soviet Union, that when Hammer was in Rostov both Mikoyan and Voroshilov1 were there, that Hammer was able to visit the pencil factory that he had organized in Moscow. Khrushchev seemed much impressed by Hammer and recalled he had been told that Hammer had earned nearly $1 million at the same time that he was attending college. Khrushchev also repeated what he had told Hammer about the Soviet process of making synthetic rubber directly from gas. He referred with pride to fact that Hammerʼs nephew had recently visited U.S. and had been urged to stay but had preferred return to Soviet Union.

(4) When I mentioned to Khrushchev at luncheon that there were few important direct problems between the US and the USSR, that our differences lay outside bilateral relations, he readily assented.

(5) During our discussion of Germany, Khrushchev to illustrate what little importance West Berlin has for the USSR said that the annual Soviet population increase is 3.5 million and that the total population of West Berlin is 2 million— “one nightʼs work.”

(6) In talking about Soviet desire to purchase urea plants, Khrushchev said that Garst2 had advised him to procure such plants.

(7) During our discussion on disarmament, Khrushchev interjected the remark that Stevenson in theUN seemed to go astray like Lodge.3 He then inquired what Lodge was doing at the present time. I told him I understood Lodge was connected with an international educational foundation.

(8) Khrushchev spoke with great conviction of the need to reform the United Nations set-up. He asserted that the US had mis-used its voting majority but what did this prove? The day might soon come when the majority would be against the US and we would then understand the Soviet position. Great powers could not be made to do things against their vital interests by UN votes. The veto provision in the UN charter had been very wise and something must be done so that the UN Secretariat could not act in favor of one side. The only solution he could find was his proposal for a three-man Secretary-General.

(9) When I mentioned that President had many important domestic problems to tackle Khrushchev remarked that all countries had their internal problems.

(10) Khrushchev not only stated that Soviet Union would overtake US in per capita industrial production by 1970 but added that later—presumably by end 20-year plan—their output per capita would be double ours. He added, however, that we need have nothing to fear from this. I observed that the Soviet Union would have to begin to devote more of their resources and manpower to service industries. Khrushchev agreed and said they were far behind us in this field.

(11) Khrushchev said his daughter Rada had come out to join him two days before but she did not appear at lunch as she was doing some work at the Novosibirsk Academy of Science. He mentioned that Radaʼs husband, Adjubei, had met President Kennedy when he was in the United States with a delegation of journalists that had been invited to the Kennedy home. Khrushchev spoke with approval of number of young men in new administration and observed that it was important to develop leaders by giving them responsibility early in life.



Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/3-1461. Confidential; Limit Distribution.

1 Kliment Y. Voroshilov, Marshal of the Soviet Union and member of the Presidium of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.

2 Presumably this is reference to Roswell Garst whose farm in Coons Rapids, Iowa, Khrushchev visited in 1959 during his trip to the United States.

3 Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., former U.S. Representative to the United Nations.





45. Airgram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, March 14, 1961.

G-666. Returning from my meeting with Khrushchev at Novosibirsk I had a two-hour conversation with Mr. Dobrynin, head of the America Section in the Foreign Office. I found this of considerable interest, particularly in view of the fact that Dobrynin has served in the United States and is as friendly toward us as any communist official I know. I began by expressing discouragement at the prospect of reaching agreement with Soviet Union on major issues in view of the wide disparity between the way the two countries saw the same problem. I suggested there was a double distortion in the Soviet view of these issues. In the first place they saw everything through the prism of Marxism and secondly, I could not help but believe that they did not get an objective picture of a given situation because of the tendency which had existed for years of reporting facts which tended to support Soviet positions. When Dobrynin asserted that they had excellent factual information, I agreed this might be true but I was convinced they did not understand what motivated western countries.

Dobrynin said that from his experience in the United States he thought we would fall behind the Soviet Union in economic development because we lack a goal. The Soviet people have the goal of overtaking the United States and are prepared to sacrifice and work hard for this. In his opinion this was far more effective than in the US where many people are satisfied with what they have and see no reason to strain themselves to increase production. I agreed that there was something in this thesis. Dobrynin went on to observe that when the Soviets achieve their goal of overtaking us this would have a major effect upon the standing of our two countries in the rest of the world. He said the US was a rich country and therefore all less developed countries looked to us for assistance and this gave us great influence. In the future it would be the Soviet Union to which they would turn.

Latin America having come up in this connection, Dobrynin said he thought we had made every possible mistake in dealing with Castroʼs Cuba. Castro had made overtures toward us which had been rejected, he had visited the US and had received what amounted to a rebuff, and each move we made to punish him was met by a counter-move on his part. I suggested that the opposite was true in that we had been most patient and had finally broken relations when virtually forced to do so by Castro. I referred also to his dictatorial moves in dismissing most of the judiciary and in arbitrarily executing hundreds of honest Cubans. Dobrynin said that bloodshed was of course deplorable. He pointed out that Lenin had wished to avoid it in the Soviet Union but was obliged to resort to terror in order to deal with counter-revolution.

Dobrynin discussed the Laos situation and our efforts to curtail the UN agenda, which I have already reported.1

In this connection I urged that at any time there was doubt about our intentions or our policies, they should ask us frankly rather than guess. He admitted that there were frequent misunderstandings. I pointed out that the removal of such misunderstandings was one of the principal reasons for the current approach to Mr. Khrushchev.

Discussing the Congo, Dobrynin said he thought our policy was influenced by our commercial interests there. I said I was sure this was not the case and thought we had very little commercial interest in that country. He mentioned diamond interests and oil companies. I said that we had important interests in some of the newly-established African countries but I thought that the Congo had been dominated commercially by the Belgians and I was not aware of any important tie-up with American industry. In any event I could assure him that there were no commercial interests in a position to influence US policy decisions. (This seems to me a good example of the Marxist slant which Soviets give to every problem.)

I was struck by the extent to which Dobrynin is convinced that the Soviet Union will achieve its goals and that democratic capitalism is doomed.

In the course of the discussion Dobrynin asked for my opinion of Ambassador Menshikov. I did not consider it expedient to answer this directly. I referred however to his intense activity in buttonholing various American public figures and by other indirect remarks indicated that I did not think he had been very successful. Later on I had occasion to remark that the type of official who in my opinion would succeed in the US was Kuznetsov. Dobrynin remarked “A number of us in the Foreign Ministry would agree with you.”

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/3-1461. Secret; Limit Distribution.

1 See Document 34.





46. Editorial Note


Ambassador Thompson offered his analysis of Chairman Khrushchevʼs thinking on Berlin in telegram 2209 to the Department of State, March 16, 1961. “All my diplomatic colleagues who have discussed matter appear to consider that in absence negotiations Khrushchev will sign separate treaty with East Germany and precipitate Berlin crisis this year. My own view is that while he would in these circumstances almost certainly conclude separate treaty, he would likely attempt avoid immediate crisis on Berlin by some method such as instructing East Germans not to interfere with Allied access for given period of time.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XIV, pages 30-33.





47. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, March 18, 1961, 1 p.m.

SUBJECT

U.S.-Soviet Relations, etc.



PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Under Secretary Bowles

Ambassador Stevenson

S/B—Mr. Bohlen

EUR—Mr. Kohler

D—Mr. Akalovsky

Mr. Andrei Gromyko, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the USSR

Mr. Arkadiy Sobolev, Deputy Foreign Minister

Ambassador Menshikov

Mr. Smirnovski, Counselor, Sov. Emb.

Mr. Grubyakov, Counselor, USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Mr. Sukhodrev, Interpreter,USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs



During the luncheon, the conversation was of a social nature.

Toward the end of the luncheon the Secretary rose to pronounce a toast. He said that he had not had the pleasure of visiting the Soviet Union although he had seen the harbor of Leningrad when he was a young student. He had made several round trips between London and Leningrad on a Soviet steamer but had not been allowed to go ashore in Leningrad. This was the least expensive way to spend vacations and everybody had a marvelous time. The Secretary said that it was well known that the hospitality of the Soviet Government and the Soviet people were unexcelled anywhere in the world. The Secretary expressed the hope that during the luncheon, and also perhaps later, useful discussion could take place with the assistance of aides as desired. He then welcomed Mr. Gromyko to Washington. Mr. Gromyko, the Secretary said, was at home in Washington because he had been Ambassador here at the time when the US and the USSR were working together to achieve victory over the common enemy. The Secretary then raised his glass to the development of friendship and of solidarity of interests between the US and the USSR.

Mr. Gromyko, in reply to the toast, said that he had indeed seen the US before and not only from a ship. (Ambassador Menshikov interjected that this had been an exception.) Mr. Gromyko then said that the Soviet Union also desired a constructive development of relations between the US and the USSR, and that he saw no other way to achieve that objective than to sit down and discuss all the problems involved. He then raised his glass to the strengthening and development of ties between the US and the USSR so that later, perhaps not in the distant future, the fruits of the labors could be seen; namely, closer and friendlier relations between the US and the USSR.

Mr. Stevenson said that he wanted to add a postscript to Mr. Gromykoʼs toast and recalled that in 1945 Mr. Gromyko had said in London that he wanted to be in a position to raise a toast to the UN when it had teeth. Of course, in 1945 the UN was in a state of infancy, but now that the UN does have teeth, the Soviet Union doesnʼt seem to like it. Mr. Gromyko replied that some teeth grew in the wrong direction and caused pain.

The Secretary then stated that before leaving the table he wanted to say that the new Administration hoped very much that the relations between the Soviet Union and the US could be improved on a serious and mutually advantageous basis. The US realized that there were a number of serious problems between the two Governments which should be thought about. Also, there were a number of lesser questions which should not be too difficult to resolve, and which were worth our attention. He said that what he had in mind was the fact that certain individuals were being held, for various reasons, in the respective countries. He noted that the US was gratified that the USSR had released the RB-47 fliers. The Secretary then expressed hope that progress could be achieved in several other areas, such as conclusion of a civil air agreement, conclusion of a consular agreement restoring consular activities in the two countries, and in the field of exchanges both on the technical level and of tourists. The Secretary remarked facetiously that the US needed dollars and that therefore it hoped that the Soviet Union would send many tourists, rich ones if possible. The Secretary went on to say that he was of the opinion that the problems affecting strictly bilateral relations between the US and the USSR were by and large simple, and that the most difficult problems were those that involved other countries. He reiterated his hope that these bilateral problems could be resolved and that as a result of that, improvement in mutual relations between the US and the USSR would be brought about. The Secretary said that the US favored open exchange programs in the fields of science, technology and scholarships, and that it was prepared to open negotiations on the next exchange agreement, which are scheduled for October or November, with bilateral informal discussions in the near future. The Secretary said that some of these lesser problems may appear to have no more significance than a thread in a web; however, one should realize that if these threads were put together, this would lead to an improvement in US-USSR relations. The Secretary then said that the Soviet people and the American people had a great deal in common. Both were gay and friendly, and American visitors were impressed by Soviet hospitality. As far as bilateral problems were concerned, the Secretary said that one problem which was of symbolic significance was that of Soviet exports of crabmeat. He said that he didnʼt know how much crabmeat the Soviet Union could send to the US or how much crabmeat the American people could eat, but he felt that solution of this problem would remove a minor irritation in our mutual relations. He said that he hoped that we could remove many such minor irritations. The Secretary then stated that the President was very much interested in a constructive development of US-USSR relations, and that as many steps as possible be made in that direction.

Mr. Gromyko replied that he appreciated the Secretaryʼs remarks and that he would like to say that the Soviet Government, and Mr. Khrushchev himself, attach great importance to US-USSR relations and that the Soviet Union believes that the significance of the relations between the two countries does not diminish with the development of the international situation but rather increases. Therefore, the Soviet Government believes that the responsibility of the US and the USSR for the international situation will increase rather than diminish. Mr. Gromyko said that the Secretary was correct in saying that there were different problems confronting the two countries. Some of them were of lesser and some of major importance. However, the development of US-USSR relations and of the world situation depended on the solution of the major problems. There was no question that the solution of the lesser problems would also influence US-USSR relations and that, as the Secretary had said, they could form a web of some significance for the development of those relations. However, the USSR believes that the main attention should be focused on the major problems. While lesser problems are of certain significance, it is the solution of major problems that will determine the development of US-USSR relations, the state of world affairs, and the question of whether there will be war or peace. Mr. Gromyko went on to say that there were several key problems before the US and theUSSR. No one would deny that disarmament was of paramount importance. It was a problem to which many other questions were related and around which many other problems were orbiting like sputniks. The second key question is Germany, particularly the question of West Berlin which at the moment brooks no delay. Mr. Gromyko said that he did not know whether the Secretary was prepared to discuss these questions in detail at this time. He said that he would not insist on their being discussed now. However, he did want to stress that these two problems were among the major problems confronting the US and USSR and perhaps they were the most important problems. Mr. Gromyko said that he wanted the Secretary, the US Government, and the President to know that the Soviet Government sincerely wants to facilitate the solution of the disarmament problem. The Soviet Union is prepared to accept the most effective kind of controls over disarmament. It was gratifying to see that all states had accepted the principle of general and complete disarmament, but that principle should now be implemented. In view of the considerations expressed by Ambassador Thompson in Moscow and by Ambassador Stevenson in New York, the Soviet Union does not insist on having a General Assembly debate on the substance of disarmament. The substance of disarmament could be discussed at a later date. He expressed hope that this willingness of the Soviet Union to postpone substantive discussion of disarmament would be appreciated. Mr. Gromyko said that he believed that the General Assembly should limit its discussion of disarmament to the adoption of a general resolution on the principles of general and complete disarmament so that the world could see that the major powers are devoting their attention to that problem. Later, when the US was ready, the composition of a smaller forum could be agreed for the purpose of resuming substantive negotiations.

The Secretary replied that he hoped that Ambassador Stevenson could work out these problems with Mr. Gromyko in New York. The Secretary said that he wanted to stress the seriousness with which the US Government is approaching the problem of disarmament. The US Government is very serious with regard to the negotiations on the discontinuance of nuclear tests and hopes that an agreement can be obtained that will be in the interest of all parties concerned and will not affect their security. As far as general disarmament is concerned, the Secretary said that he wanted to be frank on this subject. The American people have never been against disarmament, if given a chance. After World War II the US demobilized very quickly so that in 1946 there was not a single division or Air Force group ready for combat. If our military budget today is four times larger than the one we had in 1946, it is because of the events that have occurred since World War II. The fact is that democracy never likes to bear the burden of armaments in peace-time. The Secretary then observed that the US was now studying intensively the general question of armaments and hoped to be able to exchange views with the Soviet Union on that subject before formal negotiations resumed in a forum that might be established. In this area, much depends on the confidence in the national purposes of nations engaging in such commitments. The American people would welcome it if a basis could be found for arms reduction and if certain political problems were resolved and disappeared from the world scene.

Mr. Gromyko replied that he believed that the point had been reached where not only the arms race should be stopped, but disarmament should begin as well. The Soviet Union believes that the peoples of the world realize the heavy burden of arms and the need for disarmament. No wise man can be found who could say where the line should be drawn beyond which no one should go. The Soviet Union believes that all problems, including that of armaments, are created by man, and that man can resolve them. The Soviet Union is not fatalistic in this respect. It believes that the question of disarmament, including agreement between the US and the USSR, can be resolved. As to the question of nuclear tests, the Soviet Union has made very many concessions but has not seen a similar attitude on the part of its negotiating partners. Frankly speaking, the Soviet Government has gained the impression that its negotiating partners have been trying to be shrewd and to obtain an agreement that would be detrimental to Soviet interests. As the US knows, the Soviet Union has not been testing. Furthermore, there are instruments today which can detect any nuclear explosion in the world. Mr. Gromyko said that he did not know whether the Secretary wanted to discuss the details of this particular problem. For his part, he did not insist on such a discussion but would be prepared to discuss these questions if the Secretary desired. In any event, Mr. Gromyko said, one should realize that if there should be no agreement, the Soviet Union would not be the only one to stand a loss. Such a development would harm everyone and, most of all, peace and the world situation at large. With regard to strictly bilateral US-USSR relations, the Soviet Government, in so far as this depends on it, will make every effort to improve them. The Soviet Government believes that the possibilities for such improvement are inexhaustible. Political, economic, cultural and other relations could be improved. Mr. Gromyko then recalled the conversations Mr. Khrushchev had had with American business groups while in the US in 1959. Mr. Khrushchev also had similar conversations with former President Eisenhower and Mr. Dillon. The impression gained at that time was that certain US groups believed that the USSR would suffer a loss if economic relations between the two countries did not develop. This, however, is not correct; rather, the reverse may be true since the Soviet Union, in the absence of trade with the US, has developed certain branches of industry which would not have been developed had that trade existed. Nevertheless, the Soviet Union is still willing to develop economic relations if the other side is willing to do the same. Mr. Gromyko said that he mentioned the question of economic relations only in passing and only for the purpose of giving a well-rounded picture of US-USSR relations. Mr. Gromyko went on to say that the Soviet Government did not fail to note that the President and the new Administration had made certain indications of their interest in improving US-USSR relations. This interest was evident in particular from the Presidentʼs message to Mr. Khrushchev, the Thompson-Khrushchev discussion, todayʼs discussion, and also the talks with Ambassador Stevenson on disarmament. Mr. Gromyko then said that on behalf of the Soviet Government he could say that any similar steps on the part of the US Government and the President personally would not only be welcomed and understood by the Soviet Government, but would also meet with the Soviet Governmentʼs readiness to accept them. The Soviet Government is not only willing to meet such steps half-way, but is also, as before, proceeding in the direction of improving US-USSR relations. The Soviet Government is ready to take every step in that direction that depends on it. Mr. Gromyko said that, in all frankness, the Soviet Government and the Soviet people had been greatly displeased (at this point Mr. Gromyko said that perhaps the w

The Secretary observed that he believed the climate was now such as would make it possible to find out whether progress on the international scene could be made. The US Government and the American people are ready to take constructive steps. This should be done against the background of the national purposes of the various countries. The problem is not only of what we believe, but also what we do about what we believe. He then said that he did not see any reason why the two governments could not find constructive solutions of problems standing between our two countries and elsewhere in the world. The US is under no illusion that these problems are simple; obviously hard work will have to be done to resolve the details of these problems and to limit their scope. However, the US, for its part, is willing to do everything in order to bring about more constructive relations between the two countries. Obviously there are basic differences underlying our relations. As Mr. Khrushchev had said, the US could not convert the USSR, nor could the USSR convert the US. However, in the final analysis, we do not believe that the problems we are confronting are insuperable. We are devoted to peace and to constructive relations and we are prepared to work as prudently as possible to resolve the problems that divide our two countries now or may divide them in the future. Of course, the interests of many other governments and the attitudes of many other peoples are also involved in the situation and neither the US nor the Soviet Union can be indifferent to these interests or attitudes. Yet, if both sides are willing to tackle the problems constructively, they could be resolved. We believe that neither side is interested in creating a crisis. The most important objective is to maintain peace. So both sides should see what can be done to avoid difficulties and to resolve the problems which by frank discussion and statesmanship can be eliminated from our scene.

Most members of the group then retired to the Secretaryʼs office, where the conversation continued.1



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/3-1861. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved by Bohlen, Kohler, and in S on June 28. The conversation took place in the Secretary of Stateʼs private dining room. Gromyko was in the United States to attend the resumed session of the United Nations General Assembly.

1 A memorandum of the conversation on Laos, which lasted from 2:45 to 6 p.m., is ibid., 751J.00/3-1861. A 3-paragraph addendum to the memorandum is printed in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XXIV, Document 34. In a summary telegram to the Embassy in the Soviet Union on March 18, the Department of State commented that the results were quite negative and could have been accomplished in less than an hour. (Telegram 1529; Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/3-1861) For text of the agreed statement issued after the conversation, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 568-569.





48. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, March 20, 1961, 1 p.m.

2229. In frank but friendly discussion Kuznetsov yesterday believe made dent in his thinking but only small one. Depth of Soviet suspicions is incredible.

[Here follow three paragraphs on Laos.]

On disarmament Kuznetsov observed Stevenson and Gromyko had reached agreement not discuss substance disarmament at GA but would confine debate to establishing directive on general principles. I said certain we were not going to get ourselves bound to principle one treaty on general and complete disarmament and pointed out they had even exploited UN resolution to limit debate in previous meetings. On forum I said we were beginning to think no point in making concessions to Soviet point of view. We had reluctantly agreed to parity on disarmament committee and now they were pressing for their thesis of a three bloc world. I said even neutrals opposed to this and we considered committee already too large.

Kuznetsov said they were trying to be considerate of our position to give us time work out policies but pointed out we had many experts already familiar with problem. I replied that in previous meetings and in Pugwash discussion appeared to us they had not seriously studied disarmament problem. Each time we were about to come to grips with real substance they broke up meeting and walked out. I emphasized strongly seriousness with which we approaching problem but said this involved questions which were vital to our survival and no attempt of theirs to manipulate public opinion would cause us to jeopardize our security. If they wanted to exploit this situation they could do so but this would not advance cause of disarmament. Kuznetsov expressed suspicion we were merely stalling in order build up our armaments. He referred to increases in US military budget. He also referred number of times during our conversation to statements made by President and others about Eastern Europe and particularly Bowlesʼ speech at Farmers Union Convention.1 He quoted several times sentence Bowles alleged to have used to effect US could not tolerate Communist regimes. He said Soviet Govt was seriously studying meaning this phrase and others used by American statesmen. I replied sentence he had quoted did not appear in summary which I had received and basic thesis Bowlesʼ speech was endeavor find accommodation between us. I also pointed out that after Declaration 81 parties and Khrushchevʼs Jan 6 speech they could scarcely expect us not to reply. They had expressed readiness support so-called wars of liberation. In contrast I cited restraint we had shown during Hungarian affair. Would have been easy for us at that time to have stirred up Poles and East Germans but we had no desire use force or cause useless waste of lives. I said this in sharp contrast to their policy of stirring up trouble wherever they could. When he tried to slide over Communist parties statement I said declaration that US was enemy of peoples of world had made deep impression in US. He tried contend this referred only to certain circles but I suggested he re-read statement. I said we could never take actions condoning regimes in Eastern Europe unless and until they were supported by people but this did not mean we were going to take any action overthrow them.

I raised lend-lease question but got no reaction except his complaint that we were refusing sell them tractors which they could not understand.

Kuznetsov expressed opinion frank exchange of views had been helpful and hoped we would have further occasion discussions this kind.

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/3-2061. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution.

1 For text of this speech, March 14, see Department of State Bulletin, April 3, 1961, pp. 480-486.





49. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic and Consular PostsSource


Washington, March 23, 1961, 9:05 p.m.

1457. Joint State-USIA. According press reports from Moscow, Soviets have lifted censorship on despatches filed from Moscow by foreign correspondents. Dept has issued statement welcoming move as step towards removal barriers to free flow information and expressing hope it will be followed by removal bars to flow of information into USSR (principal bars are selective jamming foreign broadcasts in Soviet languages and non-availability to general Soviet public of representative non-Communist foreign periodicals and publications).

In commenting upon this action, US officials and output should take primary guidance from Dept statement (carried in Wireless File). Officials should avoid giving impression we do not regard lifting censorship as welcome advance, should stress hope this step will eventually be followed by removal or attenuation present severe controls on material from outside world available Soviet people and should draw upon following background points in order put move in context.

1. Censorship of foreign correspondentsʼ despatches was no longer effective bar to transmission censorable information to outside world, since present relatively heavy flow foreign visitors ensures many such items in any case become known outsideUSSR within a few days.

2. Consequently existence of censorship apparatus served only as propaganda liability, in removing which Soviets now able create impression further “liberalization”.

3. Ultimate sanction against foreign correspondents who seriously offend regime or consistently transmit critical material remains, i.e., Soviet ability either expel them from country or, in less urgent cases, refuse allow them re-enter once they have left USSR on leave. (Since 1945, according Dept records, six American correspondents expelled from USSR; nine refused visas.)

4. Removal censorship thus reinforces compulsion upon responsible correspondent whose duty to his employer requires him strive maintain representation in Moscow, to exercise self-censorship and avoid offending Soviet Government to point at which it would expel him or refuse let him re-enter. While censorship in operation correspondent could have some assurance it would excise material Soviet Government might regard with disfavor. Correspondent must now be his own judge in questionable cases.

5. Censorship has been lifted on outgoing material but situation unaltered with regard material available to Soviet people: latter continues be as tightly controlled as ever by Soviet Government. Most serious controls exercised through continued selective jamming foreign radio broadcasts in Russian (about 30-35% jammed out) and other Soviet languages (a high percentage of which jammed out) and through fact non-Soviet-bloc periodicals and publications (except for Communist Party literature) not available for purchase by Soviet citizens and can be read in libraries only by those who have political clearance. As facts warrant also useful cite situations elsewhere particularly in your host country, which emphasize general accessibility variety of foreign press, radio, television, motion-picture materials, in contrast with thoroughly controlled flow such materials to Soviet citizens.



Report official and press reactions to Soviet move.

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 961.63/3-2361. Confidential. Drafted by Richard T. Davies (SOV/P); cleared with McSweeney, USIA, P,AF/P, ARA/P, FE/P, and EUR/P; and approved by Davis.





50. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, March 27, 1961.

SUBJECT

Laos and US-USSR Relations



PARTICIPANTS

The President

Ambassador Stevenson

Acting Secretary Bowles

S/B—Mr. Bohlen

EUR—Mr. Kohler

D—Mr. Akalovsky

Mr. Andrei Gromyko, Foreign Minister of the U.S.S.R.

Ambassador Menshikov

Mr. Sukhodrev, Interpreter, U.S.S.R. Ministry of Foreign Affairs



The President opened the conversation by expressing his pleasure in meeting the Foreign Minister and talking with him about matters of mutual interest.

Mr. Gromyko thanked the President for this opportunity to meet him and said that he wanted to convey to the President greetings and best wishes from the head of the Soviet Government, N.S. Khrushchev.

The President thanked Mr. Gromyko.

Mr. Gromyko stated that the Soviet Government knew that the President was very much interested in the Laotian question. It was also familiar with the position of the U.S. Government and the President personally, as expressed in the Presidentʼs statement, the Thompson-Khrushchev discussion, and the conversation between Secretary Rusk and Mr. Gromyko. Therefore, Mr. Gromyko said, he wished to set forth the views of the Soviet Government, and of Mr. Khrushchev personally, on the Laotian problem. The Soviet Government had recently received the U.K. proposal on Laos,1 which was in reply to the proposal of the Soviet Government on the same question, communicated previously to the U.K. Government. The U.K. proposal, as far as the Soviet Government was aware, also reflects the U.S. Governmentʼs views.

The President confirmed this statement.

Mr. Gromyko continued by saying that the U.K. proposal was being thoroughly studied by the Soviet Government and that the latter would reply to these proposals very shortly. However, even now the Soviet Government believes that that proposal could serve as a basis for settlement in Laos, a settlement that would ensure peaceful development for the Laotian people and a policy of true neutrality for that country. Now that real ways for a settlement of the Laotian question are in prospect, it is necessary to manifest patience and restraint and not to do anything that might complicate that problem. The U.S. and the U.S.S.R., as great powers, undoubtedly can and must exert positive influence in the settling of the Laotian question by peaceful means, and undoubtedly can and must take steps to prevent the conflict from spreading. As Mr. Khrushchev had said in his conversation with Ambassador Thompson and as he, Mr. Gromyko, had said to Secretary Rusk, the policy of the Soviet Government with regard to the Laotian question is to strive for a truly independent and truly neutral Laos. If the U.S. Government is also for a truly independent and truly neutral Laos, as the Soviet Government is, possibilities exist for settling the Laotian question to the satisfaction of the U.S., the U.S.S.R. and all parties concerned. Mr. Gromyko said that these were the views he had been entrusted to convey to the President personally and to stress their significance.

The President said he appreciated Mr. Gromykoʼs remarks and expressed hope that this conversation and the Soviet reply to the U.K. proposal would lead to a peaceful settlement of the Laotian question. This is what we want. Mr. Gromyko probably understands that the U.S., as a great power, would be concerned if Laos were taken over by forces hostile to it just as the Soviet Union would probably be concerned if forces hostile to it took over that country. Therefore, it is important to stabilize the situation and prevent its further deterioration. It is for this reason that the U.S. stresses the importance of a cease-fire. The U.S. is concerned that, in the absence of a cease-fire, military activities will continue while the conference is deliberating what form the future Laotian Government should take. Both sides would put in more and more military supplies, which would make the situation all the more difficult. Therefore, the President said, he hoped that the U.K. proposal for a cease-fire would be accepted; what is needed is not only the conference but also a cease-fire. The President then said that he had read the recent Pravda article on the Laotian question and that the article indicated that there might be some ground for understanding. However, a cease-fire is important because, in its absence, Soviet supplies would continue and our supplies would continue, and that would create a more and more intense military situation. Consequently, both sides should do commonly everything to ease the situation.

Mr. Gromyko said that he could reaffirm that, after familiarizing itself with the U.K. proposal, the Soviet Government believed that there was a possibility for settling the Laotian question and that a reply to that proposal would be forthcoming in a short while. He said that he wanted to note that the fact that the U.S. Government had agreed to the convening of an international conference and the international control commission was a positive step. He recalled that when Secretary Rusk had told him about this he had told the Secretary that this was a positive step in the proper direction and that it eased the situation. Mr. Gromyko observed that Secretary Ruskʼs statement had been made at the end of their 3-hour long conversation.

The President remarked jocularly that Mr. Gromyko was a very persuasive man. He then inquired when, in Mr. Gromykoʼs judgment, the Soviet reply could be expected, and particularly whether it would be forthcoming this week.

Mr. Gromyko replied that he could give no fixed date but said that it would be in “the nearest future”.

The President stated that the situation was inflammatory and that he was anxious to have the Soviet reply as soon as possible. The sooner an understanding was reached, the better off we would be. The military situation would be behind us and efforts to discuss a settlement could begin. He reiterated his concern that the situation might deteriorate and its military aspects might become more intense.

Mr. Gromyko said he wished to reiterate and stress again that it was very important not to do anything that would further complicate the situation. It is particularly important that the U.S. and U.S.S.R. use their influence and prestige so that no action is taken that would complicate the situation and spread the conflict.

The President agreed and emphasized once again that if both sides could come to an understanding, they should do so without delay so as not to expand the conflict but rather diminish it.

Mr. Gromyko said that it was good if the U.S. was taking steps to prevent the situation from deteriorating and to create a more favorable situation in Laos and around it.

The President replied that everything should be done to prevent the conflict from escalating and reiterated that the sooner this was done the better off both sides would be. Mr. Gromyko observed that it was very good if the U.S. Government was acting in the direction of facilitating the solution of the Laotian problem. He then said that he wanted to ask a specific question relating to the Laotian problem, a question which he had mentioned to Secretary Rusk in Mr. Bohlenʼs and Mr. Kohlerʼs presence. The question was that of the presence of Chiang Kai-shekʼs troops in Laos. The Soviet Government had expressed hope that those troops, numbering about 3,000, would be disarmed and withdrawn. Unfortunately, to the Soviet Governmentʼs great regret, according to information available to the Soviet Government, no such steps had been taken so far. He said that this was a specific question within the general scope of the Laotian problem, but that he still wanted to mention it.

The President replied that the U.S. also believed that those troops should not be there. He recalled that the troops had come from Burma and that when this question had come up, the U.S. had made strong overtures to Chiang Kai-shek in order to persuade him to withdraw those troops. The President then turned to Mr. Bowles and asked whether there was any recent information on this subject.

The Acting Secretary said that as of a week ago 1,500, or more than one-half of the troops in question had been withdrawn and that the movement was continuing.

The President then reiterated that the U.S. shared the view that there was no reason for those troops to be in Laos. They were an incendiary factor and should be removed.

Mr. Gromyko observed that this was a favorable development and said that the sooner those troops were removed, the better. Their withdrawal would facilitate the settlement of the Laotian problem.

Mr. Gromyko then turned to the general question of US-USSR relations. He recalled that Secretary Rusk had expressed the U.S. Governmentʼs views concerning the development of US-USSR relations and the Secretaryʼs statement that the President and the U.S. Government were willing to take steps to improve these relations. In particular, Secretary Rusk had mentioned the possibility of bilateral exchanges of views on certain problems in order to develop US-USSR relations. This, Mr. Gromyko said, was in accord with the desires of the Soviet Government, and he wanted to assure the President that the Soviet Government had always striven and would continue to strive for the development of US-USSR relations. It would be well if some day the point was reached where genuine friendship were established between the two countries. Then both the American and the Soviet peoples could reap the fruits of improved relations.

The President replied that he shared this view and that he hoped that US-USSR relations could be developed. The problem was that of different national interests in some areas, such as Laos and certain other areas. What is necessary is to create an atmosphere where these problems could be settled without approaching the brink of a military situation. The President said that it was important to realize that differences existed in the systems and the national policies of the two countries, but that it was equally important to create an atmosphere where these differences could be settled without moves and countermoves by each of the two sides, and where neither side would have to take a strong stand. The areas where such settlements are necessary are particularly Laos, Africa and Cuba.

Therefore, the President said, he was glad to have had this opportunity to discuss the Laotian question with Mr. Gromyko. It was important to bring about solutions of these problems with due regard to the interests of the two countries and without embarrassing their respective positions or bringing us to the brink of disaster.

Mr. Gromyko said that the Presidentʼs remarks were of great interest and that the Soviet Government believed the U.S. and the U.S.S.R., as the two greatest powers, possessing the greatest military potential, should in their relations do nothing that might bring us to the brink or to the point of a choice between war and peace. Problems where possibility for settlement exist must be settled peacefully with due regard to the interests of the two countries and of the interests of other states, if such interests are involved. Mr. Gromyko then stated that as Foreign Minister of the U.S.S.R., he considered that this attitude was a proper one and that neither side should do anything that might bring them to the brink. He observed that Ambassador Menshikov surely shared his view.

Responding to the Presidentʼs invitation to make his observations, Ambassador Stevenson referred to Mr. Gromykoʼs statement in which he urged that no steps should be taken that would aggravate the situation in Laos. He said that he assumed that this also applied to the Soviet Union.

Mr. Gromyko said that he had stated earlier that both the Soviet Union and the U.S. should do nothing that might complicate the situation in Laos, around Laos, and around the Laotian question.

[The President then invited Mr. Gromyko to join him for a private talk on the lawn. The President reported that in the course of that conversation, he had reiterated the urgent need for preventing the Laotian situation from coming to a brink. Recalling the 1914 situation, he said that we should avoid a development where both sides would be moving in. He also said that the Soviet Government should not attempt to push the U.S. Government into a position where the latterʼs prestige is involved. The President also mentioned briefly the Cuban situation and the belligerent attitude of the Cuban government, as well as the Congo situation, which the U.S. hoped could be resolved peacefully. The President stressed the need for leaving communications channels clear in order to make it possible to reach solutions that would recognize the interests of both sides. The President also touched briefly upon the subject of disarmament and said that he hoped that Mr. Gromyko would be willing to reword his statement in such a way as to indicate that preliminary discussions prior to the resumption of negotiations would also involve countries other than the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. alone. The President said, however, that there would be bilateral discussions with the Soviet Union on that subject. The President said Mr. Gromyko had agreed with him as to the need for peaceful solutions and had expressed hope that there would be a chance for a personal exchange of views between the President and Mr. Khrushchev. As to his proposed statement on disarmament, Mr. Gromyko said that he would discuss this with Ambassador Stevenson in New York.]3

[During his conversation with Ambassador Stevenson after the meeting, Ambassador Menshikov, responding to Ambassador Stevensonʼs query, indicated that the Soviet reply to the U.K. proposal could be expected within three days.]4



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. Secret. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved in U on March 30 and by the White House on April 5. The meeting was held at the White House.

1 For text of the British proposal on Laos, March 23, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 994-995.

3 These and following brackets are in the source text.

4 On March 30 Gromyko told Stevenson that he found the conversation with the President interesting and useful and his line of thinking “reasonable.” (Telegram 2690 from USUN; Department of State, Central Files, 761.13/3-3061)





51. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, April 1, 1961, 5 p.m.

2362. Eyes only Secretary. After discussion of Laos problem1 Khrushchev said he was pleased at signs of possibility improvement our relations. He expressed particular satisfaction at Presidentʼs action in stopping our military from making boasting and threatening statements.2 He said each time this was done Soviet military felt obliged reply and this did much to worsen atmosphere. I pointed out President had not only taken steps to prevent statements which did not accurately reflect policy our govt, but was also strengthening civilian control over military policy. K remarked this was important and said they had had problem with Marshal Zhukov.3 He had been friend of Eisenhower and thought he was smarter than Eisenhower. When latter became President Zhukov developed big ideas about his own role. However Soviet system had no place for juntas and when they had thrown Zhukov out he had himself stated they had been right to do so.

Khrushchev said he deplored war propaganda in general and suggested we should conclude agreement, perhaps international one, to prevent publication of war propaganda. This already forbidden in Soviet Union. It might be alleged that this was interference with freedom of press but on contrary it was measure to prevent abuse of press. Press not allowed, for example, to advocate prostitution—why could it not prevent war propaganda. He also started to give example of convention banning chemical warfare but then recalled we had not adhered to this convention—something he had never understood.

I said I thought our view was that it was not really practicable to handle this problem by treaty and among other difficulties it was virtually impossible draw line and say what was war propaganda and what not. I thought however much could be done to diminish this type activity particularly if appropriate lead given at top.

Khrushchev then said he had fully agreed with Presidentʼs position that we must both display restraint and try avoid confrontation of power of our two countries. They had however been very much disturbed by Bowlesʼ speech. When I inquired what particular passage he had objected to he could not recall exactly but mentioned problems of Congo, Cuba, and Laos. (I believe Soviets had in mind particularly sentence beginning “Our international interests are not compatible with the global objectives of Soviet long-range strategy.”)

With respect to Congo K said what had happened there and particularly murder of Lumumba had helped communism. Lumumba was not Communist and he doubted if he would have become one. He was man with limited outlook who easily became excited. He remarked we had discussed this problem before and Soviet position known.

Turning to Cuba he could not agree with our policy there. Each country should be free to choose its social system. They did not agree, for example, with Yugoslav internal policies but this did not prevent them from having good relations with that country. He said President had indicated that financial aid would be given to aid in overthrow of present Cuban Govt. Bands of émigrés had been formed and threats made against Cuban Govt. He said Soviet Govt. would openly support Cuban Govt and would give them economic aid. He pointed out Soviet Union had no base in Cuba and only base there belonged to us. He then went on to question our policy of having bases all around Soviet Union. He dwelt particularly on question of Iran. He said this was poor country where govt was doing little to help people. He said Shah liked to consider himself Monarch but his ancestry not particularly enviable. We sought special rights for ourselves everywhere. Soviet Union was not threatening Iran. Our trouble was that we were not confident of our own system. We had set up alliances to protect members not only from outside aggression but from subversion. Only subversionists in countries like Iran were students and others who were dissatisfied with conditions. We had military advisors in Iran and although he indicated he was not making a demand he wished to state that it would be most useful to our good relations if these were withdrawn.

Reverting again to Cuba he asked why we did not establish diplomatic relations with that country and try to resolve our problems with it peacefully. He made clear Cubans had not put him up to this but he was merely speaking his own mind.

I replied that with respect to Congo we had hoped UN would be able deal with this problem and that we could both have remained out of it. However Soviet Union had started furnishing military and other supplies to one faction. Khrushchev intervened to state they had furnished medicines and in any event these had been supplied to legal govt. He also said we were aware of his views on UN. Hammarskjold was US agent and carried out our orders. I denied this and said many of his actions had annoyed us but we considered him objective. I went on to say that I thought what bothered us particularly about Cuba was its use as a base for attempts on overthrow of other Latin American govts. When he disputed this I said I had heard Cuban pilots were being trained in Czechoslovakia in flying jet planes. Cuba would never be able attack us and therefore these presumably were designed for use against other Latin American countries. I said we had been most patient with Castro. In first place we had cut off supply of arms to Batista4 and although there had been differences of opinion in US about Castro we had been fully prepared accept his govt. However he had made most violent statements against US and had confiscated our assets there without compensation and finally had insisted on reducing our Embassy to handful of people. We had tried to be patient but he had given us no choice. Khrushchev replied Castro said we were using Embassy to harbor spies and Castro was not Communist. He said he had not heard of any training of jet pilots but if he were Castro he would buy jet planes since these were necessary to prevent arms being dropped to counter-revolutionaries from planes flying from US. He thought that in one case we had even admitted this. I said we had taken strict steps to prevent such activities although there had I believed been one case in which a plane had gotten through. In concluding Khrushchev said we should continue to be patient and should try to improve our relations with Cuba.

He said he considered Soviet position in world was good since they were on side of people trying to improve their lot. US was supporting reactionary govts in many places. We often spoke of elections and he inquired what would be result of election in Spain or South Vietnam or South Korea. In latter Syngman Rhee5 had disappeared but new man was not much better and people were dissatisfied. He did not think even we knew what went on in Diemʼs6 govt in Vietnam. I replied that there were cases where we supported reactionary govts and there were two reasons for this. First was that we did not believe we should intervene in internal affairs of these countries and second was we were concerned at these countries being threatened by Communist expansion. Khrushchev said he welcomed Presidentʼs idea of our competing in economic field and in such matters as culture and to see who could bring people the most happiness. If our system could demonstrate it could do this better than communism he was ready to embrace our system. I said I could only repeat what I had said to him before, namely that much of our difficulty came from our different points of view and misinformation and misunderstanding. US wanted nothing more than prosperity and happiness of all peoples throughout world but we did not think this should come about by outside intervention. Khrushchev replied Soviet Union was also against intervention in othersʼ affairs but there was no justification for ring of US bases around Soviet Union.7

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/4-161. Confidential; Priority.

1 In telegram 2354 from Moscow, April 1, Ambassador Thompson reported that Chairman Khrushchev had called him in that day to give him a copy of a Soviet aide-memoire responding to the United Kingdomʼs proposal of March 23 for an international conference on Laos and an immediate cease-fire. For text of telegram 2354, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XXIV, pp. 110-111. The aide-memoire expressed both Soviet satisfaction that the United Kingdom now agreed to convening an international conference and Soviet support for a cease-fire appeal. Text of the aide-memoire is printed in Department of State Bulletin, April 17, 1961, pp. 545-546.

2 On January 27 the White House had introduced stiff controls over speeches and statements by U.S. military spokesmen.

3 Georgi K. Zhukov, Marshal of the Soviet Union and Minister of Defense, was dismissed by Khrushchev at the end of 1957 for “adventurism” and “Bonapartism.”

4 Fulgencio Batista y Zaldivar, President of Cuba until January 1959.

5 President of the Republic of Korea.

6 Ngo Dinh Diem, President and Secretary of National Defense of the Republic of South Vietnam.

7 In telegram 2361 from Moscow, April 1, Thompson reported that Khrushchev expressed his agreement with the Presidentʼs proposal for a summit meeting at the end of May, and that he would reply directly to Kennedy about it. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/4-161)





52. Editorial Note


In a memorandum to President Kennedy, April 1, 1961, McGeorge Bundy discussed “some of the key diplomatic issues in the probable diplomacy” regarding Laos, commenting that “the Soviet Union in agreeing to negotiation believes that it can secure eventually what it is taking rapidly by military action. Consequently, we should consider immediately what encouragement and hard assistance might be given to Thailand, Cambodia, and South Vietnam to strengthen their position with respect to a ‘neutral’ Laos which will provide a bridge to their borders for Communist subversion and guerrilla operations.” For text of the memorandum, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XXIV, pages 112-116.





53. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, April 1, 1961, 6 p.m.

2365. Eyes only Secretary. Difficult convey in telegram exact tone of conversation such as that today with Khrushchev.1 In order conserve time interpreter frequently not used and too great emphasis should not be placed on exact words. He was friendly throughout discussion and seemed quite pleased and hopeful at Presidentʼs initiative. Re Bowles speech I believe they are genuinely concerned that we may be saying that accommodation with us means they must renounce any support of govts which come into being by revolution and refrain from adopting attitude which would encourage such revolutions. This they not prepared do. Realistic question is whether they prepared refrain from initiating active subversion. With possible exception Laos they feel they have clear conscience since in Cuba and Iraq they did not take initiative. Khrushchev said he had never heard of Castro until it was announced he had taken Havana. Even in Laos they consider they were responding to our initiative. I am not supporting these contentions but believe they should be taken into consideration in judging Sov intentions. Khrushchev pointed out there is no industrial proletariat in country like Congo and he mentioned they had excellent relations with Ghana and Guinea which were not Communist countries. Sovs of course wish to expand their influence and his citing latter two countries not particularly reassuring. My judgment is Sovs will continue give political and propaganda support to movements against what they consider reactionary govts throughout world and that they will extend their influence wherever possible but that they can be brought to refrain from militant subversion by direct action such as heavy infiltration of agents, etc. I believe Khrushchev recognizes that newly developing countries particularly in Africa will not be ripe for communism for long time to come. I consider most discouraging aspect Khrushchevʼs current policy is his attitude toward UN Secretariat which will have wide repercussions on other problems including disarmament.3

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 661.00/4-161. Secret.

1 See Document 51.

3 On April 4 Thompson transmitted airgram G-736, which added eight minor vignettes on the conversation with Khrushchev. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/4-461)





54. Editorial Note


The Presidentʼs Special Assistant, Arthur Schlesinger, expressed his opposition to the planned paramilitary action against Cuba in a memorandum to President Kennedy, April 5, 1961. He argued that the operation was likely to turn into a protracted civil conflict which would “give the Soviet Union a magnificent opportunity to wage political warfare. Cuba will become our Hungary; and, since our pretensions to international good behavior have been greater than those of the Russians, we would be more damaged by Hungary than they were (and they were considerably damaged).” Schlesinger questioned, however, the view that “this operation would have serious substantive effect on Soviet policy, in Laos or elsewhere. My guess is that the Soviet Union regards Cuba as in our domain and is rather surprised that we have not taken action before this to rid ourselves of Castro.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume X, pages 186-189.





55. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet UnionSource


Washington, April 5, 1961, 7:23 p.m.

1673. Eyes only for Ambassador. You will have noted White House announcement April 31 setting firm dates worked out with French for Presidentʼs visit to Paris May 31 through June 2. We are repeating to you Deptel to Paris2 regarding plans for this visit and will repeat future messages as pertinent. President would be prepared to proceed to Vienna for two-day “get acquainted” meeting with Khrushchev on June 3 and 43 provided (1) these dates convenient to Khrushchev and (2) international atmosphere appropriate for such meeting at that time. Latter would presumably depend mainly on progress toward settlement question of Laos and Soviet restraint in not stimulating other crises. For example, if Laotian situation were still as sensitive as now, or if new crisis had developed in another area, popular reaction in the US would probably be hostile to a meeting and thus prevent it from assisting in the relief of international tensions. Therefore, President would not wish now to have any firm understanding that might later need to be changed, with attendant danger of recrimination. Nevertheless, suggest you should seek early opportunity to discuss dates and these other aspects of the question on tentative basis with Khrushchev or Foreign Minister.

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.11-KE/4-561. Secret. Drafted and approved by Kohler and cleared with the President, Rusk, Bundy, and Bohlen (in substance).

1 For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, p. 569.

2 Telegram 1668 to Moscow, April 4. (Department of State, Central Files, 711.11-KE/4-461)

3 On April 10 Thompson reported that Gromyko believed June 3 and 4 was acceptable, but would confirm it with Khrushchev. (Telegram 2441 from Moscow; ibid., 711.11-KE/4-1061) The following day Thompson cabled that Khrushchev had agreed. (Telegram 2459 from Moscow; ibid., 611.61/4-1161)





56. Editorial Note


From April 4 to 6, 1961, Frank G. Siscoe, Director of the Soviet and East European Exchanges Staff, visited Moscow for conversations with various Soviet officials about U.S.-Soviet cultural, scientific, and technical exchanges. On April 5 and 6 he met with G.A. Zhukov, Chairman of the State Committee for Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries, and after explaining that both President Kennedy and Secretary of State Rusk were interested in the exchange program, developed a list of problems and opportunities on the question. On April 4 and 6 he talked to M.S. Prokofiev, Deputy Minister of Higher Education, about exchanges in the field of education; on April 5, with G.V. Aleksenko, Deputy Chairman of the State Scientific and Technical Committee; and on April 6, with S.V. Kaftanov, Chairman of the State Committee for Radio Broadcasting and Television. At the end of the meetings Siscoe extended an invitation to Zhukov to visit the United States for further discussions after each side examined its programs in light of the otherʼs desiderata. Memoranda of all these conversations were transmitted in despatch 705 from Moscow, April 13. (Department of State, Central Files, 511.613/4-1361)





57. Editorial Note


In telegram 1722 to Moscow, April 12, 1961, Secretary of State Rusk expressed concern at the effect in Laos of the Soviet delay in responding definitively to the British proposal of April 5, particularly the call for a cessation of hostilities. Rusk instructed Ambassador Thompson to remind Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko of President Kennedyʼs statement during their meeting on March 27 that “while we seriously and wholeheartedly supported the goal of a neutral and independent Laos, free from any foreign alignment or domination, the United States as a great power could not stand by if forces hostile to the United States sought to take over the country by military means.” For text of telegram 1722 and information on the British proposal of April 5, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XXIV, pages 124-125. President Kennedyʼs report of his meeting with Gromyko on March 27 is ibid., pages 105-107.

Gromyko responded to the British proposal on April 16; British analysts cited two major shortcomings in the response: it did not explicitly accept a cease-fire as a precondition for an international conference, and it did not provide for an immediate International Control Commission presence in Laos to verify the cease-fire. (Ibid., page 135) However, following a meeting on April 19 between Gromyko and the British Ambassador to Moscow, the United Kingdom recommended to the United States that it accept the Soviet response as “explained” by Gromyko with the understanding that it would not be binding on the United States and that the West would not attend the conference unless there were a cease-fire by May 5. The U.K. recommendation was discussed at a meeting of the Laos Task Force on April 19. For text of the memorandum of the meeting, see ibid., pages 137-138.





58. Editorial Note


The landings of the Cuban Expeditionary Force at the Bay of Pigs on the southern coast of Cuba began on April 17, 1961. On April 18, the Department of State received telegram 2550 from Moscow conveying a letter to President Kennedy from Chairman Khrushchev. The letter, which the Soviet Government made public, expressed “indignation” at the invasion of Cuba by armed bands “trained, equipped and armed in the United States” and called on Kennedy to “put an end to aggression.” The letter also declared that the Soviet Union would “render the Cuban people and their government all necessary help to repel armed attack” and implied that the Soviet Union might retaliate by menacing U.S. interests elsewhere. President Kennedy responded the same day in a letter handed to Ambassador Menshikov and released to the press. Kennedy stated that the “United States intends no military intervention in Cuba” but could not conceal its “admiration for Cuban patriots who wish to see a democratic system in an independent Cuba.” Kennedy also warned the Soviets not to use the situation in Cuba as a pretext to inflame other areas of the world. For text of the two letters, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VI, pages 7-10.

Khrushchev replied to Kennedyʼs letter of April 18 in a long letter of April 22 in which he reiterated and expanded upon his charge of aggression against Cuba and again pledged Soviet support for Fidel Castroʼs government. For text, see ibid., pages 10-16. The Department of State responded the same day with a statement in effect dismissing Khrushchevʼs letter as unworthy of reply. For text, see Department of State Bulletin, May 8, 1961, page 663.

In the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs crisis, U.S. policy makers reassessed Soviet involvement in Cuba and the threat posed to the United States and its interests in Latin America. In a memorandum to President Kennedy, April 21, Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs Rostow raised the issue of “a potential Soviet offensive base in Cuba.” The United States must decide whether to permit Castro to acquire defensive arms, asserted Rostow, and “what the touchstones are between defensive arms and the creation of a Communist military base threatening the U.S. itself. I assume that evidence of the latter we would take virtually as a cause of war.” For text of the memorandum, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume X, pages 310-312.

In an April 26 paper prepared for the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency reviewed Soviet bloc military aid to Cuba, noting that since September 1960 its value was estimated at between $50 million and $100 million. A May 2 report prepared jointly by the Department of State and the Central Intelligence Agency stated that “with continuing material and technical assistance from the Bloc and with further military training and political indoctrination, under Bloc tutelage, the combat effectiveness of the Cuban armed forces will substantially increase. The Bloc will probably provide some MIG-17ʼs when Cuban pilots training in Czechoslovakia return home. However, the buildup of a sizable jet air force in Cuba will probably be a slow process as compared with the improvement of the army. Nonnuclear air defense missiles may be supplied to Cuba, but the Bloc will not supply offensive type missiles nor nuclear weapons.” A May 4 paper prepared for the National Security Council by an Interagency Task Force on Cuba stated that there was “no danger of effective direct attack against the U.S.” and only a “remote possibility of an attempt to convert Cuba into a Russian base for strategic attack on the United States.” However, Cuba clearly served “as an exporter of physical aids to revolution” and “as an example and stimulus to communist revolution.” For text of the two papers and the report, see ibid., pages 389-390, 417-422, and 459-475.





59. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet UnionSource


Washington, April 20, 1961, 5:11 p.m.

1786. Eyes only Ambassador. Igor Melekh departed US April 7, due Bremen April 14, and should therefore be arriving Moscow anytime.1

You will recall (1) Soviet Embassyʼs informal approach to Department February 17 urging Melekhʼs release as gesture help improve relations; (2) Departmentʼs response March 3 that US Government prepared consider Melekhʼs early release on condition Soviet Government would release Powers; (3) Ambassador Menshikovʼs counter-response March 17 to Under Secretary expressing hope we would release Melekh without conditions, as they had released RB-47 fliers; (4) Under Secretary informed Menshikov March 23 of decision release Melekh as effort show good will and eliminate causes misunderstanding. (You should have all memoranda above conversations.)2

While we clearly have no commitment for release of Powers, one interpretation of Soviet actions described above is that Soviet Government would be prepared respond favorably to request for release Powers as contribution to betterment relations if we were to have released Melekh unconditionally, and we were at least partially motivated by this interpretation in taking action as we did. You should therefore seek appointment at appropriate level in Foreign Ministry and recall these informal conversations re release of Melekh. You should indicate that, in light of Soviet approach, we took action to free Melekh unconditionally and that we are now hopeful that Soviet Government for its part will release Powers in similar step to help eliminate differences between us. Timing this approach left to your discretion, although we hope it can be made fairly soon.3

Bowles



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.5261/4-2061. Secret; No Distribution Outside Department. Drafted by McSweeney and Boster (EUR/SOV); cleared with Bohlen, Chayes, and Kohler; and approved by Bowles.

1 Igor Y. Melekh had been arrested for espionage in October 1960.

2 A memorandum of Bowlesʼ conversation with Menshikov on March 23 is in Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/3-2361. No memoranda of the other conversations have been found, but the Department of State transmitted brief summaries of the first two in telegram 1431 to Moscow, March 4. (Ibid., 711.6261/3-461)

3 On May 4 Thompson reported that he had taken up the release of Powers with Gromyko who stated that the Melekh and Powers cases were entirely different and had nothing further to say about the matter. (Telegram 2711 from Moscow; ibid., 261.1111/Powers, Francis Gary)





60. Editorial Note


In telegram Supnu 1549, April 21, 1961, the U.S. delegation to the Geneva Disarmament Conference informed the Department of State that since the resumption of negotiations on March 21 the Soviets had “not only stood still on positions they have been maintaining since the summit meeting last spring” but have made it “clear that they are not budging in even the most minute particular from previous positions.” In a memorandum prepared for a National Security Council meeting on April 22, John McCloy stated that “it now appears clear that the intent of the Soviet negotiators at Geneva is to avoid a prompt conclusion of a Test Ban Agreement.” For texts of telegram 1549 and McCloyʼs memorandum, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 41-47. Earlier, in National Intelligence Estimate 4-2-61, “Attitudes of Key World Powers on Disarmament Issues,” April 6, the intelligence community had expressed its belief “that the Soviet leaders see, in agitation of the disarmament issue, a prime opportunity to further their political purposes in the non-communist world. What is not so clear is the extent to which they may actually desire to conclude agreements on disarmament.” For text of the NIEʼs conclusions, see ibid., pages 35-38.





61. Editorial Note


National Intelligence Estimate 11-7-61, “Soviet Short-Term Intentions Regarding Berlin and Germany,” April 25, 1961, concluded: “We believe that in the relatively near future the USSR will present a formal demand for the renewal of negotiations on the question of a peace treaty for ‘the two Germanies’ and a new status for Berlin. Almost certainly, Khrushchev still prefers to negotiate on this matter rather than to provoke a crisis by unilateral action, chiefly because he desires to avoid the risks of a showdown in this dangerous area of East-West confrontation.” For text of the NIEʼs conclusions, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XIV, pages 56-57.





62. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet UnionSource


Washington, May 2, 1961, 7:02 p.m.

1885. Your 2679 and 2695.1 Professor Byrnes, Chairman of Inter-University Committee, informed substance reftels and reacts as follows:

Difficult be specific from distance in situation like this. However, cannot overemphasize concern and desire for Gribble and Kirsch reconsider matter in terms their whole future life and happiness. Committee strongly hopes students would seriously reconsider, particularly in view (a) difficulty and possible inability for wives obtain exit permits (what would students do if wives cannot leave?) (b) fact emotions may mislead one in strained emotional and physical environment such as experienced by exchange students in U.S.S.R. (Is this time and place to make such important life-long decision?) (c) possible motivations of girls other than or in addition to normal feelings of love including possible desire find means of leaving U.S.S.R. or possible police control of girls (d) possibility for police pressures and dangers to families of girls who remain in U.S.S.R. and through them on girls and ultimately on their husbands. (End Brynes statement)

Department agrees serious efforts to discourage these marriages should be continued.

NY Times approach based on Committee passing of information to its Times contact on info-only basis. Committee has taken necessary steps with Times prevent any premature use.2

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 511.613/5-261. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Martens (EUR/SES) and approved by SOV, OEE and Siscoe (EUR/SES).

1 Telegram 2679, April 28, reported that Embassy officials had tried to dissuade Charles Gribble and Leonard Kirsch, who had come to the Embassy that day to announce that they intended to marry Russian women the following week. (Ibid., 511.613/4-2861) Telegram 2695, May 2, reported that a New York Times correspondent was aware of the situation but had agreed to hold the story until informed of developments by the Embassy. (Ibid., 511/613/5-261)

2 On May 4 the Embassy in Moscow reported that after a talk with Ambassador Thompson, Gribble agreed to postpone his marriage for at least a year, but Kirsch intended to proceed. (Telegram 2718 from Moscow; ibid., 511.613/5-461) On May 17 the Embassy reported that Kirsch had been married that day. (Telegram 2826; ibid., 511.613/5-1761)





63. Editorial Note


Under cover of a memorandum dated May 3, 1961, Deputy Secretary of Defense Gilpatric forwarded to President Kennedy for consideration by the National Security Council a paper entitled “A Program of Action To Prevent Communist Domination of South Vietnam,” which had been prepared by an interdepartmental Task Force. Among the paperʼs proposals was the following: “We should consider joining with the Viet-Namese in a clear cut defensive alliance which might include stationing of U.S. forces on Viet-Namese soil.” Such a move “would place the Sino-Soviet Bloc in the position of risking direct intervention in a situation where U.S. forces were already in place.” For text of the paper, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume I, pages 93-115.





64. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, May 4, 1961.

Developments in Soviet Foreign Policy

Moscow last week expanded its attacks on the US over the events in Cuba to include vituperative criticism of the President personally as well as broad denunciations of US policies—especially in the “Observer” articles in Pravda on 28 and 30 April. While the Soviet leaders are determined to exact the maximum propaganda gains from the Cuban developments, their treatment of the May Day activities suggests that they do not plan a long period of bitter hostility toward the US such as followed the U-2 incident. Their statements made no mention of the U-2 affair of last May Day, and the official editorials for this yearʼs celebrations and the address by Marshal Malinovsky were relatively moderate in comparison with the “Observer” articles and not predominantly anti-American in content.

Pravdaʼs editorial on 1 May, however, referred to the “criminal intrigues of American imperialism” in Cuba, and Malinovsky in his order of the day and speech in Red Square repeated this line, stating that “armed intervention” against Cuba was organized by “imperialist circles of the US.” Malinovsky also warned that the “aggressive circles of the imperialist states … are resorting more and more frequently to military action to put down the growing national liberation movement” in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.

The military section of the Moscow parade differed little from those in recent years. No new equipment was shown, and the emphasis was on missiles and armor, a common practice for several years. Malinovsky claimed at one point that the USSR now has “perfect weapons which excel anything an army has ever had.” Although this could be taken to refer to weapons as yet unrevealed, it is more likely that he was merely praising the general quality of Soviet military equipment. In Berlin, the East German Army displayed 21 T-54 medium tanks and about 15 armored amphibious tanks, the first seen in its possession.

Malinovskyʼs warning that West Germany is the main point of military peril in Europe reflects the increasing attention given to Germany by the bloc. A communiqué issued on 28 April at the end of Rumanian leader Gheorghiu-Dejʼs visit to Warsaw called for the “fastest possible” conclusion of the German peace treaty and transformation of West Berlin into a demilitarized free city. The communiqué also warned that the bloc would sign a separate peace treaty if the Western powers continue to “endlessly delay the conclusion of a treaty with the two German states.”

Khrushchev also took up the German and Berlin issues in his conversation with West German Ambassador Kroll on 24 April. He used this talk to offset the impression that he was committed to a showdown on these issues before the Soviet party congress in October. He claimed that originally he planned to call for a settlement of the problem during the first quarter of 1961 but that he had decided to give President Kennedy more time.

While strongly emphasizing his determination to settle the issues during 1961, Khrushchev told Kroll that the bloc had set no precise deadlines and would be willing to wait until the West German elections and “possibly” until after the party congress before convening a bloc peace conference to sign a separate treaty with East Germany. Such restraint, however, would depend on no “unexpected” Western moves, such as a Bundestag meeting in Berlin.

As to the consequences of a separate peace treaty, Khrushchev stated that the Western powers would have to make arrangements with East Germany to maintain their communications with Berlin and that he would advise Ulbricht to abolish the air corridors. In response to Krollʼs statement that this could bring about an international crisis, Khrushchev said he was convinced that the West would not risk a general nuclear war over Berlin. He said that he expected the West to resort to economic sanctions and possibly a break in diplomatic relations, but that the USSR could cope with such measures.

Khrushchev assured Kroll that the prospect of a showdown over Berlin “need not affect negotiations already begun with the US,” but added that he was skeptical about the outcome of any such negotiations. Although Khrushchev failed to mention prior East-West negotiations before a bloc peace conference, his willingness to give the President more time suggests that he still expects a further round of negotiations. His readiness to wait until next fall also suggests that he is aware that the process of arranging new talks will take longer than he anticipated last fall and that negotiations could extend beyond the party congress.



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Secret; Noforn. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 7-8 of the Weekly Review section of the issue.





65. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Secretary of StateSource


Moscow, May 4, 1961, 4 p.m.

2710. Eyes only Secretary. Gromyko called me in this afternoon and reading from paper made following statement. NSK would have liked personally to have talked with me and to have set forth certain considerations in connection with confidential letter from President Kennedy1 that I had transmitted to him in Novosibirsk. However he is leaving Moscow and expects return only by May 20. Soviet Govt and NSK deplore fact that discord has occurred of late between our two countries in connection with events regarding Cuba. He would not like to repeat what was said by Soviet Govt and NSK personally with regard to Cuba and US policies concerning that country. Position of Soviet Govt on this question was repeatedly outlined by NSK personally including occasion of his talk with me in Novosibirsk. SovGov regrets that the above-mentioned events have taken place and also regrets events in Laos as they have declared to USG in setting forth views of SovGov on Laotian problem. But if Soviet Union and US do not consider that there is an unbridgeable gulf between them, then both should draw appropriate conclusion from this, namely that we live on one planet and therefore ways should be found to settle appropriate questions and to build up our relations. In other words bridges have to be built which would link our countries. This viewpoint is held by SovGov. Initiative displayed in regard to a meeting by President Kennedy met with favorable attitude on part of SovGov and at present it would like to know whether or not proposal by President Kennedy on meeting and exchange of views remains valid or whether proposal made is being revised.SU still thinks above-mentioned initiative is useful for both countries.

Events that took place lately yet again confirm necessity of contacts between US and SU including contacts at highest level. Soviet Union owes debt in sense they have not yet replied by letter to confidential letter of President Kennedy in which was formulated proposal on meeting. Before sending reply they naturally would like to know how matters will take shape now. If President as hitherto favors meeting and exchange of views on relevant problems that is one thing. If for some reason he now holds different viewpoint that is quite another matter and Soviet Union would regret if that is so. Gromyko said he would be grateful if I could inform him on this matter whenever I am in position to do so.

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/5-461. Secret; Priority.

1 See Document 41.





66. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Secretary of StateSource


Moscow, May 4, 1961, 5 p.m.

2714. Eyes only Secretary. Much hope that President will maintain plan for meeting NSK. Recognize there will be problem domestic public opinion but believe meeting could be divorced from recent events by revealing date of original proposal. Moreover on questions of Congo, Laos and Cuba President has made clear his firm stance in face of Soviet actions. Believe meeting would be useful for following among other reasons: 1) On short range, prospect of meeting will cause more reasonable approach by Soviets on such matters as Laos, testing, and disarmament;

2) On long range, Soviets will be taking major decisions at Party Congress for which preparations now in progress and it is to our interest to influence these decisions;

3) Mere fact of meeting will exacerbate Soviet-Chinese relations;

4) Believe Soviets correct in stating that recent events make meeting even more necessary;

5) Consider on balance meeting would strengthen position of US before world opinion and put US in better position to take strong stand on Berlin and other questions;

6) Despite recent sharp exchanges and Soviet actions do not believe there has been any major change in Soviet policy or Khrushchevʼs intentions. While it has always been clear that Soviets seek communization of world Khrushchev continues advocate peaceful means. Essential point of exercise would be to further Presidentʼs policy of recognizing basic conflict of interest between us but endeavoring to avoid or minimize confrontation of two great powers in military sense. In this connection at risk being considered apologist suggest we should keep in mind that in recent trouble spots; Iraq, Congo, Cuba and so far as I am informed Laos, Soviets did not initiate crisis but followed their usual policy of taking advantage of opportunities.





Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/5-461. Secret; Priority.





67. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet UnionSource


Washington, May 6, 1961, 1:03 a.m.

1919. Eyes only for Ambassador from Secretary. Your 2710 and 2714.1 You should tell Gromyko that the President agrees with the considerations which Gromyko set forth to you concerning a meeting. The President remains desirous of meeting Khrushchev. He hopes that it will be possible to adhere to the original schedule of early June in Vienna but is not at the moment in a position to make a firm decision on this point. However, he will be able to give a definite reply prior to Mr. Khrushchevʼs return to Moscow on May twentieth.

FYI—In addition to the problem of the relationship of the meeting with Khrushchev to the De Gaulle visit, there are, as you indicated in your comments, a number of other considerations which the President must have in mind before making a definite commitment. Chief among these is the situation in regard to Laos but we should well before May twentieth have a clearer indication of the probable course of events. If for example the Laos subject is in the process of pacific negotiations at the proposed Geneva Conference, this would be a circumstance which would render the meeting easier from the point of view of public opinion here and abroad. If on the other hand the conference does not take place and the situation is again exacerbated in Laos, it would not be desirable for the President to be meeting with Khrushchev.

The President is taking up in a confidential personal message with De Gaulle2 the question as to his reaction in the light of the Paris visit to a meeting with Khrushchev immediately thereafter and this will be an important initial factor in the Presidentʼs ultimate decision. What you should seek to convey to Gromyko is the Presidentʼs continued desire to meet Khrushchev and leave no impression of any holdback in this respect but merely emphasize that there are a number of considerations which have to be examined before a definite date can be set.

For domestic political reasons the President would have to be in a position of indicating certain specific subjects that he was to discuss with Khrushchev. Obviously one would be the nuclear test talks since according to present plans they will still be in session in early June. Since it would be desirable to have more than one subject, we would appreciate any suggestions that you have concerning other questions which President might discuss with Khrushchev, with some prospect of progress, to be publicly announced along with test ban topic. The fact of public announcement would obviously exclude a number of questions in particular Berlin, but possible upcoming disarmament talks apart from test ban might be conceivable.3 End FYI.

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/5-461. Secret. Drafted by Bohlen, cleared by Kohler, and approved by Rusk.

1 Documents 65 and 66.

2 The text of this message, dated May 5, was transmitted to Thompson in telegram 1920 to Moscow, May 6. (Department of State, Central Files, 711.11-KE/5-661)

3 In telegram 2736, May 6, received in the Department of State at 3:14 p.m., May 6, Thompson reported that he had given Gromyko the message at 3:30 that afternoon. (Ibid., 611.61/5-661)





68. Editorial Note


The opening of the International Conference on Laos in Geneva, scheduled for May 12, 1961, was postponed in order to resolve a dispute between the West and the USSR on the seating of Laotian delegations. In telegram Secto 118 to the Department of State, May 14, Secretary of State Rusk reported that Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko continued his insistence that the Pathet Lao delegation be one of the three Laotian delegations seated. Gromyko did agree, however, to a statement that all three were delegations “from” and not “of” Laos. Rusk recommended that the United States agree to the opening of the conference on that basis, though taking every opportunity to make clear that the U.S. considered the Royal Laotian Government the only government in Laos. The conference convened on May 16. For text of telegram Secto 118, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XXIV, pages 193-195.

In telegram Secto 164 to the Department of State, May 17, Rusk, expressed concern that events were moving more rapidly in Laos than had been expected “with respect to a coalition government which we will not like.” He noted that the “Commies in Geneva are full of confidence and appear to be utterly relaxed about achieving their goals in Laos.” Their speeches were moderate and their demeanor friendly. “I find it difficult to believe that this is because they want a neutral Laos as we see it.” For text, see ibid., pages 199-200.

In telegram Confe 65 from Geneva, May 27, Averell Harriman, then acting head of the U.S. delegation at the Conference on Laos, decried continued Soviet stalling tactics at the conference and increasingly active fighting in Laos. “Soviet maneuvers have placed us in exact position we earlier declined to accept, namely, attending conference before cease-fire effective.” For text, see ibid., pages 209-210.





69. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, May 16, 1961, 10 a.m.

SUBJECT

Khrushchevʼs Letter of May 12 to President Kennedy1 and Possibility of Meeting in Vienna, June 3 and 4



PARTICIPANTS

The President of the United States

Mr. Richard H. Davis, Deputy Assistant Secretary for European Affairs

Ambassador Menshikov, Soviet Embassy

Mr. Georgi M. Kornienko, Counselor, Soviet Embassy



At his request, Ambassador Menshikov called on the President at 10:00 a.m. today and read to him from an English translation made by the Soviet Embassy the text of a letter dated May 12 from Chairman Khrushchev in reply to the Presidentʼs letter of February 22,2 which was delivered to Mr. Khrushchev by Ambassador Thompson in Novosibirsk on March 9.

After Ambassador Menshikov had finished reading the text, the President commented that the last time the subject had been broached was in the conversation of Ambassador Thompson with Foreign Minister Gromyko and he had indicated a reply would be forthcoming by May 20 when Mr. Khrushchev was expected to return to Moscow. At that time it was not clear when the conference on Laos would begin and when the international atmosphere would be conducive to a meeting or whether it should be put off. Now there have been these press reports about the possibility of a meeting. The President said he would wish to talk to Secretary Rusk before giving a definite reply but he would expect that in the next two days a reply might be given.

The President added that if it is decided to go ahead with the meeting Vienna is a place which appeared to be mutually agreed upon and he would expect to leave late in the afternoon on Friday, June 2, from Paris and would stay in Vienna Saturday and Sunday, leaving Vienna either Sunday night or Monday morning. Secretary Rusk would accompany him.

The President continued that if he is going ahead on this meeting, one of the problems would be how this meeting should be described in public statements. It would not be useful to say that we are going to reach agreement on Laos or a nuclear testing ban because if we could not reach agreement then nothing would come out of the meeting. It would perhaps be best to emphasize that this would provide an opportunity for a general exchange of views.

The President remarked that he had only met Mr. Khrushchev once before and that was as a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on the occasion of Mr. Khrushchevʼs visit to this country. The President was doubtful that any agreement on Laos or on nuclear testing would be reached by the time of his visit to Europe and it was important that the hopes of the peoples not be disappointed by false expectation of concrete results from a meeting. He wanted to better the present situation and not worsen it. In this connection, the President made a passing reference to reports which had already appeared in the press speculating on the possibility of a meeting between himself and Khrushchev.

Ambassador Menshikov slyly remarked that nothing had appeared in the Soviet press, as the President knew. The President responded that he had felt impelled to inform President De Gaulle of the possibility of this meeting3 in view of his official state visit to France, that inevitably this involved others becoming aware of this possibility, and, moreover, he believed that Chairman Khrushchev had informed Walter Lippmann during the latterʼs recent visit to Moscow.4 The important thing was that an accurate impression be given in any public statements which will be made as to the purpose of the meeting, which, in his view, would be for a general exchange of opinions on many issues which, of course, involve the interests of other countries and could not be the subject of negotiation or agreement between just the US and the USSR.

Ambassador Menshikov quoted from the final paragraphs of Khrushchevʼs May 12 letter referring to a general exchange of views.

The President then went on to remark that if we cannot accomplish anything concrete on a nuclear test ban, it would be doubtful that we could make progress on disarmament; that it was easier to make progress on a nuclear testing treaty and we should try to make progress there. One of the reasons the President desired to talk with Khrushchev was that he believed the nuclear test talks were crucial negotiations and if we failed it could not help affect progress on other matters, particularly disarmament.

There was then some discussion as to what Ambassador Menshikov should say to the press who were waiting in great numbers outside. It was agreed that Ambassador Menshikov should merely say that he had delivered a message from Chairman Khrushchev in reply to the Presidentʼs letter of February 22. The White House would confirm this but not add anything until there had been a reply on the subject of a possible meeting with Chairman Khrushchev in Vienna. In this connection, the President pointed out that we would have to talk with the Austrians and that he desired to talk with Secretary Rusk before giving a final reply. If it was decided to meet in Vienna, it would be desirable to discuss the type of public statement which might be issued by the US and Soviet Governments.

Ambassador Menshikov remarked that the President had used the word “if”. The President replied that he remembered that in the last conversation between Ambassador Thompson and Gromyko that the Ambassador had said we would communicate our final decision before May 20 when Mr. Khrushchev was expected back in Moscow; that the final decision would depend on the international climate at the time; that a month ago the atmosphere was not as satisfactory as it had been previously or, perhaps, as it was today. However, the President would talk with Secretary Rusk and he would hope that a response could be made within the next day or so.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/5-1661. Secret. Drafted by Davis and approved in the White House on May 22.

1 See Document 35.

2 See Document 35.

3 See Document 67 and footnote 2 thereto.

4 Walter Lippmannʼs articles on his April 11 interview with Khrushchev appeared in The Washington Post, April 17-19, 1961. The Embassy in Moscow transmitted a 1-page summary of the conversation in telegram 2472 from Moscow, April 11. (Department of State, Central Files, 961.6122/4-1161)





70. Telegram From the Department of State toAll Diplomatic PostsSource


Washington, May 18, 1961, 3:40 p.m.

1823. At 10 AM Washington time Friday, May 19, President plans announce meeting with Khrushchev in Vienna June 3 and 4. If this announcement made,1 missions may in their discretion draw on following background in discussions with Government and public leaders where appropriate.

Purpose of meeting is to take advantage of convenient opportunity for first personal contact between two leaders and general exchange of views. Idea that such a meeting might be useful when international atmosphere was right first discussed through diplomatic channels earlier this year, but following developments in Laos and Cuba US had dropped idea from active consideration. Soviet Government recently reopened question of meeting and agreement was reached to proceed at this time.

Mission officials should emphasize, in any discussions they may have, that meeting will not seek to negotiate or reach agreement on major international problems which it is recognized involve the interests of many countries and on which there must be full consultation between US and its allies.

Bowles



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/5-1861. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Boster and cleared with Davis, Bohlen, Guthrie (SOV), and the White House. Also sent to the Mission at Berlin.

1 For text of the announcement, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 569-570.





71. Editorial Note


On February 21, 1961, Assistant Secretary of State Kohler sent Secretary of State Rusk a memorandum asking him to raise at a Cabinet meeting the question of Soviet Ambassador Menshikovʼs appointments with U.S. officials. In reply Rusk asked whether the U.S. Government might request the Ambassador to make all such appointments through the Department of State and how this practice conformed to Soviet procedures in Moscow. In an April 12 memorandum Kohler replied that Soviet practice was to conduct all appointments through either the Foreign Ministry or Ministry of Foreign Trade, but that in recent years direct contacts with Soviet officials had expanded, and the Department of State was “most reluctant to provide any excuse for a reversal of this trend.” To this end he suggested raising at Cabinet level coordination of Menshikovʼs appointments “in some fashion.” (All in Department of State, Central Files, 601.6111/4-1261)

Under Secretary of State Bowles discussed the problem with McGeorge Bundy following the Cabinet meeting on April 20 and proposed that the question be handled in a memorandum from the Department of State to the White House suggesting that individual memoranda be sent to each Cabinet member outlining the procedure for making appointments with Menshikov. (S/S memorandum, May 3; ibid., 601.6111/5-361) On May 20 the Department of State sent the memorandum to the White House asking that any official having “any discussion” with Menshikov provide the Department of State with a record of the conversation and offering to make available for such meetings, officers proficient in Russian. (Ibid., 601.6111/5-2061)





72. Paper Prepared in the Department of StateSource


Washington, May 23, 1961.

PMK-A/1

PRESIDENTʼS MEETING WITH KHRUSHCHEV

Vienna, June 3-4, 1961

Scope Paper

I. U.S. Objectives

A. To improve the prospects of finding an acceptable and workable basis for improving relations with the Soviet Union.

B. To impress on Khrushchev our capacity and resolve to resist Soviet and communist encroachments if he is unwilling to seek a satisfactory basis for better relations and to stress the dangers attendant on continued, sharp confrontations between the two countries.

C. To communicate to Khrushchev the Presidentʼs understanding and grasp of the world situation, in an historical as well as immediate sense, and his capacity and intent to influence the course of world events.

D. To gain a clearer understanding of Khrushchev as a man and of Soviet policy and intentions.



II. Khrushchev

A. Khrushchev will probably seek—directly or indirectly— to convey and gain acceptance of the following view of the world situation: 1. The world is divided into two power systems, the communist and the capitalist.

2. The communist system is firmly established beyond challenge in the bloc countries and the processes of political change can take place only in the non-communist countries.

3. The balance of world power has shifted and is shifting toward the communist system, the Sino-Soviet bloc.

4. The Soviet Union does not wish to advance that process by war, that is, a major global nuclear war.

5. Neither can the capitalist powers afford to inhibit that process by resort to war.

6. The capitalist powers must recognize the “realities” of the world situation, i.e., the power shift toward the bloc, and accommodate themselves to changes which accord with the “will of the people,” i.e., Laos, Cuba, the Congo.

7. Part of this “realistic” approach requires the recognition that no significant decision on international questions anywhere in the world or in international bodies can be taken without accommodating the views of the Soviet Union.

8. The process of contention between the systems can be carried on by all means short of war, i.e., overt war across international borders, without the risk of global war and without serious effect on U.S.-Soviet relations or the prospects of disarmament.

9. Those relations should be improved; there are no important bilateral differences impeding them; but the U.S. should remove its discriminatory trade policies and withdraw from foreign bases threatening the USSR.

10. The Soviet Union is seriously interested in disarmament but not control and inspection systems without actual disarmament; its proposals are comprehensive and control provisions could be worked out if the Western powers accepted the Soviet proposals.

11. The problems of Berlin and a peace treaty are urgent and should be solved.





B. Khrushchev probably is confident that the communist chances in the long run are good. However, he has a healthy respect and probably a reasonably accurate understanding of the military power and productive capacity of the Western nations, particularly the United States. He, therefore, has little taste for risky adventures.



He believes that there is still room for steady communist gains. This belief stems in part from his doubt that the Western powers have the will or resolve to translate their resources into the elements of power sufficient to cope with the bloc and his doubt that they can find the basis for building effective non-communist political institutions in the under-developed countries. He, consequently, is led to the conclusion that by alternating pressure and overtures he can make the gains at the negotiating table and by shielding local Communist advances with Soviet power. He is also constantly conscious of the specter of growing Communist Chinese power and this gives him added reason to maintain his communication with the Western powers and to explore the terms of a possible accommodation with them.

There are indications that he is sufficiently concerned over the risks of nuclear war and sufficiently convinced of Soviet political capabilities abroad to be seriously interested in disarmament. However, he finds political capital in playing on the disarmament issue and has apparently not thought through the problems associated with disarmament in any meaningful way. He, therefore, has probably not reached conclusions on the terms under which various disarmament measures would be acceptable.

He will undoubtedly press hard his position on Berlin and a peace treaty with East Germany and will try to get some form of commitment to negotiate the Berlin question.

This meeting itself gratifies him and he may extend the President an invitation to visit the Soviet Union if the talks go reasonably well from his point of view.

III. Tactics

In an exchange of this type, particularly with so outspoken an leader as Khrushchev, it is not practicable to expect that the course of the talks can be charted in advance. However, the total content of the Presidentʼs remarks to Khrushchev should convey the clear impression that essentially two broad alternatives are open to the Soviet Union. It can seek to encroach on the free world. In this event, force will surely be met with counter-force, the costly and dangerous arms race will be continued and probably accelerated and the risk of nuclear war will probably become acute. Alternatively, it can seek an accommodation of legitimate Soviet national interests with ours, reduce the intensity level of our confrontation, open up the prospect of arms limitation with its attendant benefits and broaden the area of mutually profitable cooperative endeavor. It should be borne in mind that current Soviet foreign policy which Khrushchev will espouse presupposes the charting of a course profitable to the Soviet Union between these two alternatives.

The tone of our approach should not be ultimative. It can emerge from the discussion of our approach to the vital problems of U.S.-Soviet relations as the realistic recognition of the logical course of events. We keep well to the forefront of the discussion our earnest desire and our readiness to build a basis for constructive relations and our conviction that this course is in the Soviet as well as our national interest. But we make it clear that our patience has already been severely tested and that we are determined that there be no Soviet illusion concerning our intent and capacity to resist communist encroachments by whatever means are needed.

Perhaps one convincing way to make the point is to stress the urgent need and our most serious desire for prompt agreements on disarmament measures and to insist throughout the talks that all other questions, including Berlin and Germany specifically, are secondary to this one. It should be made explicit that this does not mean that disarmament talks can proceed hopefully regardless of the state of political relations. On the contrary, it should be stressed that the acceptance, whether formal or tacit, of reasonably orderly and peaceful procedures for affecting political change and protecting national and human rights is fundamentally necessary to an atmosphere in which disarmament talks could be promising. Exchanges on this point will afford ample opportunity to convey our determination to meet communist incursions and to articulate our concept of a peaceful world community within which legitimate Soviet national interests can continuously be accommodated or negotiated.

The talks might well be opened with a discussion of the nuclear testing talks. This is a subject in which we have an immediate interest and a current tactical advantage; it serves to emphasize our interest in disarmament, and the Soviet tripartite proposals are both a matter of important concern to us and a favorable ground on which to criticize the Soviet world outlook and the dual nature of Soviet foreign policy.

The Presidentʼs exposition and criticism of the Soviet world outlook and the reality of communist rule within individual countries will inevitably call forth a spirited if not heated rejoinder. Khrushchevʼs reply will doubtless be lengthy. In order to preserve time during the second day for an exposition of our view of a constructive world order, the discussion of matters more capable of solution and to reserve the possibility of ending the talks on a hopeful note, this sensitive topic should probably be brought up toward the end of the first dayʼs conversation.

The second day would proceed from the discussion of divergences in beliefs to more immediate problems of courses of action: disarmament negotiations, the possibility of negotiations on Germany and Berlin, the provision for peaceful transition in the newly independent areas, and, if it is appropriate, cooperative endeavors in the fields of science and exchanges.

IV. Invitation to the Soviet Union

The President might say that he appreciates the invitation and would welcome the opportunity to visit the Soviet Union. Both he and Khrushchev appear to have heavy schedules for the immediate future. An improved outlook for U.S.-Soviet relations would be a desirable background for such a visit. As Khrushchev visited here in 1959, there would appear to be no need for a reciprocal invitation to him at this time.

V. Communiqué

It will be difficult, if not impossible, to avoid a joint communiqué. A draft communiqué which seeks to exclude language the Soviets might favor but which we wish to avoid has been prepared as a starter.1 The final communiqué will have to be drafted toward the end of the talks.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 1905. Secret. Drafted by Armitage and cleared by Kohler. In preparation for the Summit meeting the Department of State drafted five series of papers. Series A: General; Series B: Position Papers; Series C: Bilateral Issues; Series D: Background Papers; and Series E: Reference Papers. Complete sets of these papers, which were transmitted to the White House on May 27, are ibid.

1 A copy of the draft, PMK-A/7a, is ibid.





73. Paper Prepared in the Department of StateSource


Washington, May 23, 1961.

PMK-A/2

PRESIDENTʼS MEETING WITH KHRUSHCHEV

Vienna, June 3-4, 1961

Talking Points

Testing Talks

1. The U.S. attaches great importance to the prompt and successful conclusion of a testing agreement not only for itself but as a means of moving to prevent proliferation of nuclear weapons and particularly as providing evidence and precedent of U.S. and Soviet ability to reach agreement on an important issue and in the disarmament field and to create a favorable climate for moving forward in broader fields of disarmament. The consequences of failure are seriously adverse.

2. After many months of negotiations, the U.S. undertook thorough and serious review of its position, and the U.S. delegation returned to Geneva with proposals going a considerable way to meet the Soviet position. The President expected that agreement could be promptly reached; he still hopes it can.

3. The Soviet response has been disheartening. Not only has there been no Soviet attempt to negotiate seriously but the Soviet Union has withdrawn previous agreement on a single Administrator and has introduced a new political obstruction by its proposal for a tripartite Administrator.

4. A tripartite Administrator is not a negotiable proposal. It is totally unacceptable as it would make a control system unworkable by introducing political differences into every administrative and operational measure.

5. It is also wholly unnecessary. The political concerns of the parties are fully provided for in the Control Council and the United States went far to accommodate Soviet desires in its composition.

6. If the Soviet Union continues to base its position on this principle, there seems little hope for progress in broader disarmament negotiations. The U.S. is not prepared to sign any disarmament agreement with an inoperable administration.

7. It is just possible that Khrushchev will drop the tripartite administration proposal and propose a broad formula for settling the important remaining differences. Alternatively, he may ask for the Presidentʼs suggestion. The President will need to be prepared to use such an opening to discuss the major issues and hopefully to move the talks toward agreement.

8. If Khrushchevʼs position is rigid and if—but only if—we have made a decision to resume testing in the absence of progress at the talks, the President should convey to Khrushchev, in whatever terms seem appropriate, the understanding that we regard resumption of testing as our only alternative if no agreement can now be reached.



World Situation

1. We reject the Soviet view of the world and particularly the shift of power to the bloc, and stress that for the USSR to act on it will mean an intensification of the arms race, a blow to the chances of disarmament and greater risk of the war all should seek to avoid.

2. The system of world Communist parties—and the program for action prescribed at the Moscow conference by representatives of the Soviet and eleven other bloc governments—constitute blatant interference in the internal affairs of the 69 other countries from which Communist delegates come, and are a major deterrent to world peace. To make this point we could probe Khrushchevʼs reaction were there a similar system of democratic parties with branches in bloc countries and we might detail the subversive Communist activities in South Viet-Nam.

3. We spell out the contradiction between Soviet national interest and the maintenance of the world Communist system, stressing our mutual paramount interest in disarmament and the economic well-being of our peoples and emphasizing in some detail how Communist China will pose this contradiction in more acute and explosive form in the not distant future. We also note the remote connection between Soviet national interest and the engagement of Soviet power in distant areas like Cuba, Laos and the Congo.

4. The Soviets can believe Communism will be adopted throughout the world, including the U.S. We believe that democracy will emerge in more and more countries, including the USSR. The important issue is what we each do to bring the objective about and whether we can create the political machinery to accommodate the processes of peaceful change.

5. Great restraint is required and we do not consider that the USSR has understood, appreciated or reciprocated the restraint we have shown in Eastern Europe where the political potential for our exploitation is as great as that of the colonial areas is for the Soviets.

6. Soviet endorsement of war in colonial areas (Moscow conference) and Soviet efforts to poison and exploit relations between newly independent countries or colonial areas and the Western powers can only lead to more instances of violence and greater danger the hostilities will expand past control. Past Communist successes should not obscure this truth. In fact, they have made our reaction more certain.

7. In our view the national interests of our countries are not directly involved in the character of the regimes in the newly independent countries—so long as the prospect is kept open for expression of the popular will.

8. We have no desire to exclude the Soviet Union from normal relations with the newly independent and under-developed countries—but we can not consider those relations fully normal so long as the USSR maintains its ties with local Communist parties and groups.

9. We detail our concept of a more stable order. Mention could be made of the broad scope for cooperative action—in outer space, in help to under-developed countries, in the fields of science and technology. If the talks have made the moment propitious, cooperative endeavor and expanded exchanges might be discussed in greater detail.



Disarmament

1. In the interest of their own security, the well-being of their people and the peace of the world the U.S. and the Soviet Union have a profound common interest in disarmament.

2. In the absence of agreements the proliferation of nuclear weapons and the greater rapidity with which delivery systems will operate, still greater risks will become probable.

3. The U.S. is prepared to disarm all its forces except for those required for internal security and any forces required to provide authorized security forces for the UN. Disarmament, however, is only one component of a peaceful world community ruled by law and providing for orderly processes of peaceful change and progress in this field must progress in disarmament, particularly in the later stages.

4. Given the advanced state of modern arms, disarmament is an extremely complex matter. It involves the most vital questions of national security. It is, therefore, imperative that it be carried out in a way which builds the confidence and trust of the participating parties at all stages. This is equally important for all sides; should serious doubts arise that the system was fulfilling its functions, the prospects for disarmament would be set back for a long time. Some discussion of the common interest in effective control would be in order. Some emphasis might be put on the vital necessity of the control system covering existing as well as surrendered armament and on the incompatibility of the present Soviet concept of military secrecy and a viable control system.

5. Consequently, the provisions for implementing and controlling disarmament must be worked out with care and thoroughness. It is not too much to say that the problem of disarmament is virtually the problem of the provisions for its effective and safeguarded execution. We regard no disarmament proposal as really serious that does not come to grips with the control problem.

6. We have suggested that the U.S. and the USSR exchange views prior to a resumption of negotiations. Agreement has now been reached to begin the discussion on June 19. We have made this suggestion for the purpose of attempting to arrive at an understanding on the basic framework in which disarmament negotiations should be conducted and on the negotiating forum. At the same time, we would like to discuss actions the two sides could take in order to minimize the dangers inherent in modern weapons systems. For our part, we have been seeking to introduce in our forces safety and precautionary devices aimed at reducing accidents or misinterpretation. However, there is a limit to what we can do unilaterally and we would hope to discuss what can be undertaken of a reciprocal nature.

7. We will have proposals to make when disarmament talks are resumed. TheUSSR will also presumably have proposals. We would hope that the negotiations could proceed promptly to a serious consideration of specific disarmament measures without lengthy delay in discussing the merits of the two approaches. Perhaps examination of the means of implementing both Soviet and allied proposals could proceed simultaneously.

8. We regard disarmament as a subject too serious to play politics with in the scheduled bilateral talks. We conceded to the Soviet position in order to get talks initiated in the Ten-Nation forum. While we regard disarmament as a concern of all powers, it is a subject for negotiation between the powers directly concerned. The commencement of negotiations should not be delayed by attempts to take them out of that context.



Germany-Berlin

1. As Khrushchev has pointed out, disarmament is the paramount question of our relations. Questions of Germany and Berlin are second-ary in comparison. They and the question of European security can be approached in a more promising context when progress is made in disarmament.

2. Aspects of the situation in Berlin and Germany are unsatisfactory to the Western powers as well as to the Soviet Union but nothing is intolerable to either; the security interests of the Soviet Union are not threatened.

3. The wisest course is to leave the situation alone until arms reduction makes solutions easier.

4. The association of West Germany in NATO and other forms of European integration should alleviate instead of exacerbate Soviet concern. West Germany has accepted significant limitations on its sovereignty and institutionalized the defensive nature of its armament.

5. Khrushchev may recall that by his menacing policy Stalin was primarily responsible for creating what he least desired, a coalition of Western European powers and the United States.

6. Khrushchev might seriously ponder the effect that unilateral Soviet moves in Germany might have. The restraints which Chancellor Adenauer has exercised in his conduct of German affairs should not be taken for granted—nor could the Soviet Union assume that Adenauer or his successors would be able to exercise them regardless of Soviet actions. Soviet moves might well make such policies untenable in Germany and might bring about the developments in Germany theUSSR seeks most to avoid.

7. In Berlin the U.S. has undertaken firm commitments and obligations together with its allies. It must and will honor its commitments regardless of the cost.

8. If Khrushchev defends the “free city” proposal, the President might state that the U.S. is not prepared to make the fulfillment of its commitments dependent solely on the will of the Soviet Union.

9. As Khrushchev will doubtless press the matter, we should be prepared to say that we will undertake negotiation of the problems of Berlin and Germany at a suitable time, but only as part of a broader discussion of problems of concern to both of us.



Laos

1. There are a few reports intimating that the USSR intends to protract the Geneva Conference on Laos in order that Premier Khrushchev may seek to “settle” basic issues bilaterally in his talks with the President, despite the mutual understanding that these talks are only exchanges of views. Whether there is any real basis for such reports is unclear. However, it is probable that (a) a violent, military scuttling of the cease-fire by the Communists will not occur prior to June 3, (b) Premier Khrushchev will raise the problem of Laos in such a manner as to seek some U.S. “agreement” on ways to settle this problem, (c) the present Royal Lao Government under Prime Minister Boun Oum will still be in office, and (d) the Geneva Conference will still be under way.

2. The President might welcome both statements that the USSR, like the U.S., seeks a truly neutral Laos and USSR moves, in the capacity of co-Chairman, to seek a peaceful settlement through the present Conference. Since that Conference is in session for the expressed purpose of resolving the Laotian problem, it would be inappropriate to attempt to shift negotiations to the Vienna meeting. However, the President might note that the co-Chairmenʼs instructions to the ICC, which led to its recent return to Laos, stated the ICCʼs basic tasks would be, first, “fixing the cease-fire” and, secondly, exercising control over the execution of an agreement to be negotiated among the belligerent parties on questions related to the cease-fire. Despite these instructions, Pathet Lao represent-atives, in talks convened to discuss “questions connected with the cease-fire,” insist that arrangements for a coalition government must be negotiated before cease-fire questions can be resolved. In the U.S. view, the USSR is in a key position, both by virtue of its contacts with the Pathet Lao and in its capacity as a co-Chairman, to persuade the Pathet Lao and Souvanna Phouma2 elements to negotiate agreements on questions related to the cease-fire promptly in order that the ICC may properly discharge the co-Chairmenʼs instructions.

3. The U.S. agreed to attend the Geneva Conference on the express understanding that a properly verified cease-fire existed before the Conference was convened, and it was the assumption of the United States that the ICC would be able to carry out its continuing verification functions during the Conference in accordance with the instructions of the Geneva co-Chairmen to the ICC. The attempt of the Pathet Lao and Souvanna group negotiators at Ban Namone to introduce substantive discussions into the talks there as a precondition to negotiations on matters pertaining to the cease-fire is preventing theICC from operating in the manner contemplated.





* * *



* Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 1905. Secret. Drafted by Anderson and Armitage (SOV) and cleared by Kohler.

2 Prince Souvanna Phouma, leader of Laotian neutralists.





74. Editorial Note


In telegram 2887 from Moscow, May 24, 1961, Ambassador Thompson reported that the previous evening Chairman Khrushchev had told him that “if no agreement [is] reached on Berlin they [Soviet Union] would sign separate peace treaty in fall or winter after [West] German elections and probably after [Soviet] Party Congress. This would end our occupation rights and East Germans would control communications. He realized this would bring period of great tension but he was convinced would not lead to war.” For text of telegram 2887, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XIV, pages 66-69.





75. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Kohler) to Secretary of State RuskSource


Washington, May 25, 1961.

SUBJECT

United States Travel Restrictions



Problem

To determine whether we should revise our present restrictions on the travel of Soviet citizens in this country.

Background

In 1952, the United States retaliated against long-standing Soviet restrictions on the travel of American citizens in the USSR by requiring that Soviet officials in the United States give advance notification of travel outside the immediate area of New York and Washington. If the Department denied permission, the trip had to be cancelled. In 1955, the requirement was extended to all Soviet citizens other than those who were members of the UN Secretariat. Closed zones, modeled on those in existence in the USSR, were also established. This followed adoption by the NSC of NSC 5427 (Tab E)1 which provided that “restrictions should be placed upon diplomatic and official representatives of Soviet bloc countries in the United States on the basis of strict reciprocity for restrictions placed upon U.S. representatives in each Soviet bloc country.”

On November 11, 1957, the United States proposed to the Soviet Government that closed zones be abolished on the basis of reciprocity.2 Subsequently, we have repeated that proposal several times and have also suggested partial elimination, again on a reciprocal basis. The United States last repeated these offers in a note of January 6, 19613 which made a number of changes in the American closed zones in response to the Soviet changes announced in August 1959.

The Soviet Government has never replied officially to these proposals although there have been unofficial intimations from Soviet officials that the question was being studied. Ambassador Menshikovʼs statement to you on February 34 that his government has tried several times to approach the matter of lessening travel restrictions but had been prevented by unfavorable developments in its foreign relations is consistent with these earlier intimations. A summary statement concerning the history of the restrictions is attached (Tab B).

Discussion

From time to time the Department has been under public pressure to abolish or reduce travel restrictions. The principal thrust of this pressure has been against individual restrictions which have prevented Soviet citizens from traveling to a particular area. The sources of the pressure have usually been American citizens who were inconvenienced by the inability of Soviet citizens to travel to their areas. There has also been a certain amount of pressure from individuals and groups which feel as a matter of principle that travel restrictions are alien to our way of life and should be abolished entirely.

The restrictions have on occasion been the source of difficulties for us by complicating the administration of the East-West Exchanges Program. Our attempts to cope with the situation have bred numerous exceptions, some of which we have been able to employ to gain reciprocal exemptions from the Soviet side. With regard to the Soviet restrictions on our Embassy staff in Moscow, however, the restrictions have been of only limited utility as a bargaining tool.

It should be noted here that the Soviet authorities sometimes exercise a certain amount of flexibility in permitting American exchange visitors and tourists to visit areas that are formally closed. As a consequence, these American visitors receive the impression that the Soviet restrictions are less onerous than they actually are. Also, the recent abandonment of advance censorship of the dispatches of foreign correspondents in the USSR indicates some sensitivity to our complaints over this practice and may presage similar steps in the field of travel.

Ambassador Thompson has previously opposed elimination of travel restrictions for exchange visitors because of his belief that important Soviet visitors are probably those most annoyed by the limitations. Such visitors, he has pointed out, are in all likelihood raising their influential voices against restrictions in the USSR. The Ambassador has now stated, however, that while up to now he has not advocated an exemption for Soviet exchange visitors, he would not oppose such action and believes it might enhance our overall position on exchanges with the Soviet Union.

Substantial easing of our travel restrictions at this time may call forth strong protests from some parts of Congress and public opinion which may express concern for its effect on security. The FBI may also oppose any significant lessening of the restrictions on the grounds that this would make their counterintelligence task more difficult.

On balance, it appears that we might gain some advantages if we could advance a sufficiently dramatic proposal for reduction of restrictions that would, simultaneously, protect our security interests. It is even conceivable that such a proposal could prod the Soviet Government into some easing of its restrictions on American travel in the USSR. In any case, it must be admitted that our efforts over the course of the past six years to use our travel restrictions as an instrument with which to exert pressure for a lessening of Soviet restrictions have been largely ineffective. Moreover, the passage of time has resulted in a blurred impression abroad of the responsibility for the initial imposition of travel restrictions. This has tended to remove any incentive the Soviet Government might once have had to consider a reciprocal reduction of restrictions. While we would weaken somewhat our ability to get reciprocal treatment in the negotiation of exchange itineraries, this disadvantage seems outweighed by the advantages.

If we should decide to withdraw some or all of our travel restrictions, there are three general possibilities to be considered.

1. We could withdraw the restrictions entirely, abolishing the closed zones as well as the notification requirement for Soviet officials. While this would undoubtedly have the greatest advantage from the propaganda standpoint, we do not believe it would succeed in inducing the Soviets reciprocally to lift their restrictions and we would have lost all of our leverage for protecting the ability of our officials to travel in the Soviet Union. Further, we would lose all control over the travel activities of the Soviet Embassy and UN Mission officials.

2. We could abolish closed zones for all but retain the notification requirement for permanently assigned officials. This would have nearly as much propaganda advantage as would lifting the restrictions altogether (since it is the closed zone concept which is the most controversial aspect of our travel regulations) and yet would enable us to retain effective control over Soviet travel through our ability to deny any given travel request under the notification system. While there would be a very slight security disadvantage from the fact that there would no longer be specified closed zones, it should be noted that the closed zone system offers very little real security in any event as the Soviets are able to obtain information through many sources, including other bloc travelers not subject to closed zone regulations and from American Communist agents.

3. We could abolish the closed zones for exchange visitors and tourists but retain them for officials, who would, in addition, continue to be subject to the notification procedure. This would also bring some propaganda benefit, and would largely remove the present friction with university and exchange-minded groups. (It is true that some friction may continue in those cases in which the Department decides to control the itineraries of visiting Soviet nationals for security or other reasons, but this should be manageable.) At the same time, it would enable us to retain our present controls over the most important categories of Soviets, the officials permanently assigned here, and would also probably retain for us some leverage in protecting the travel of our own officials in the Soviet Union. Since exchange groups travel on the basis of mutually agreed itineraries, control of such travel would remain in our hands and access to any part of the country could be denied if this were thought desirable for security reasons. As the itineraries of Soviet tourists in the United States are arranged by American travel agencies, we would also maintain effective control over such travel. Soviet buyers and other “businessmen” would continue to be controlled, as they are now, via the advance itineraries they are required to submit.



For travel control purposes we regard Soviet correspondents, Intourist and Amtorg representatives, whether or not permanently assigned, as officials. They are subject to the same notification requirements as Soviet Embassy andUN Mission personnel. This category also includes Soviet citizens who apply for visas in order to visit Soviet officials on a “personal” basis. This corresponds to the position in theUSSR of American correspondents, American Express Company representatives and personal guests of American officials.

It has been suggested that, if we decide to reduce our restrictions, we do so only for a stipulated period of perhaps one year, with the understanding that they would be resumed if the Soviet Government failed to respond to our initiative. This appears to us seriously to reduce the impact we might achieve with such an overture by casting doubt on our sincerity. At the same time, it seems unlikely that it would appreciably strengthen our bargaining position. Were the Soviet Government to fail to ease its own restrictions, we should have to reinstitute our own with the negative political effect this would have. It would seem preferable not to lift the restrictions at all rather than to go through this procedure.)

Conclusion

We believe that the third alternative is the most advantageous of the three and recommend your approval of it. We would retain virtually the same degree of effective control over Soviet travel as we do now, while removing the greatest source of friction with American groups. This alternative also preserves our bargaining position on strictly official travel which may be of assistance in attempting to ensure reciprocity for our officials in theUSSR while, at the same time, enabling us to gain an important propaganda advantage. We could announce such a decision as another modest but forward-looking step in the direction of more normal relations with the Soviet Government and invite it to respond to our initiative.

Recommendations

1. That you approve our recommendation that we abolish our system of closed zones for Soviet exchange visitors and tourists.5

2. That you sign the attached letters to the Central Intelligence Agency and the Departments of Justice and Defense requesting their comments on our suggested memorandum to the President (Tab A).6





* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 601.6111/5-2561. Secret. Drafted by Edward I. Killham (SOV); concurred in by Bohlen, Tubby, Coombs, Whitman, Chayes, H, SCA, and S/EWC; and transmitted through and initialed by Bowles. None of the tabs is printed.

1 Not printed, but see Foreign Relations, 1952-1954, vol. VIII, footnote 9, p. 1246.

2 For text of this note, see Department of State Bulletin, December 9, 1957, pp. 934-935.

3 For text of this note, see ibid., January 23, 1961, pp. 119-120.

4 See Document 21.

5 According to a note attached to the source text, Rusk neither approved nor disapproved this recommendation, presumably because his approval was not necessary until it was concurred in by other agencies.

6 None of these letters, which were transmitted on June 9, is printed, but see footnote 2, Document 184.





76. Paper Prepared in the Department of StateSource


Washington, May 25, 1961.

PMK-D/2

PRESIDENTʼS MEETING WITH KHRUSHCHEV

Vienna, June 3-4, 1961

BACKGROUND PAPER

Soviet Aims and Expectations

Summary

Khrushchev will regard the Vienna talks as far more important than a probing of the Presidentʼs views. In discussing foreign relations in general, Khrushchev will expound the Soviet line on peaceful coexistence, stressing in particular the need for both sides to avoid actions which could produce nuclear war and the thesis that the US must draw appropriate conclusions from the growth of Soviet power. He will seek specific agreements, and will expect that the conference outcome will set the pattern for Soviet diplomacy for some months to come. Khrushchev would prefer that the talks end on a note of accord, and may make some conciliatory gestures for this reason. But his attachment to this aim will depend primarily on the outcome of the talks on major issues. Probably Khrushchevʼs foremost aim will be to obtain some commitment to hold resumed negotiations on Berlin and Germany. Short of a categorical rejection of any further negotiations on Berlin, Khrushchev would probably be willing to accept considerably less than his optimum demands on conference arrangements. Khrushchevʼs approach to disarmament questions is less predictable, but the possibility of modifications in the present rigid Soviet position on a test ban agreement or general disarmament cannot be excluded.

Introduction

The Vienna talks will be the culmination of a procession of Soviet approaches—some made as early as last November—for a meeting between Chairman Khrushchev and President Kennedy. This record leaves little doubt of Khrushchevʼs keen interest in the meeting.

The record also contains clear pointers to the topics the Soviet leader will want to discuss. He will stress the need— (a) to arrive at an early, negotiated “interim” settlement of the Berlin question,

(b) to reach an understanding on various issues relating to disarmament and security,

(c) to “slow down” the arms race,

(d) to base US-Soviet relations on the principles of “peaceful coexistence” Soviet style, and

(e) to expand US-Soviet trade.





Khrushchev may also invite the President to visit the Soviet Union, and despite his intimations to the contrary, may raise the questions of Cuba and Laos. And, of course, he will wish to sound out President Kennedy as a leader, to test the man against impressions and hypotheses formed by Soviet diplomats and propagandists.

While this much is clear, these matters are of such scope and elasticity that they give Khrushchev considerable leeway in deciding how to play his cards. Before examining these particulars, it is useful to analyze several trends in Soviet policy which will have a bearing on Khrushchevʼs approach to the conference.

Trends and Pressures in Soviet Policy

Soviet diplomacy over the past year has shown marked inconsistencies. These inconsistencies have been partly the result of immediate circumstances, but in almost every instance they also reflect certain deeper, inherent features of present-day Soviet foreign policy.

In the first instance, “flexibility” is the hall-mark of Khrushchevʼs style. This flexibility takes shape in several ways. But most pertinent here is the tactic of alternating assertive and détente phases in the expectation that the West can be induced to yield positions peacefully through negotiations in a period of détente by virtue of the pressures that led up to it. Khrushchevʼs handling of the Berlin issue can be explained to an important degree in these terms.

Beyond this contrived ambivalence, there is also a true inconsistency in Khrushchevʼs diplomacy which has been increasingly discernible in recent years. The implications of the nuclear age, the political isolation in which Stalinʼs rigid policies placed the USSR and the communist movement, and internal requirements of the Soviet regime, compelled Stalinʼs successors to develop a new look in foreign policy—a strategy based on minimizing the risks of nuclear war, consolidation of Soviet holdings in Eastern Europe, a paternalistic alliance (where possible) with the forces of nationalism in the underdeveloped world, a generally gradualist approach to the goal of bringing communist parties to power, and more open and normal state relations between the West and the USSR.

On the other hand, the USSRʼs acquisition of a growing strategic strike force and increasing economic power have lent a new, assertive impulse to Soviet policies in recent years. Khrushchev maintains that the change in the world “correlation of forces” to the USSRʼs advantage should compel the West to recognize the “reality” of irrevocable communist rule in Eastern Europe, to “normalize” such anomalies as West Berlin and the unrecognized status of East Germany, and to refrain from “counter-revolution” (intervention) in the face of communist advances outside the bloc.

Both of these trends are compatible with the Soviet understanding of that elastic concept, peaceful coexistence. And Khrushchev would like to have the best of each. He seems to hope that by incessant though relatively unprovocative pressures (primarily political) he can consolidate and extend Soviet influence, particularly in the underdeveloped world. At the same time, he seems to hope that when these pressures do arouse adverse reactions, he can minimize the military risks (in relations with the US) and the political liabilities (in relations with nationalist neutral governments). But a harmonious blending of these approaches is not always possible, even in the day-to-day functioning of Soviet diplomacy. Over the long run, these two trends hold profoundly different implications for Soviet relations with the free world.

Finally, even deeper contradictions flow from the dual role the Soviet leaders play as rulers of the USSR and heads of the communist world. In the former role, their primary concerns are the security and the political-economic well-being of the Soviet state. But the impulses these concerns lend to Soviet policy often are circumscribed or nullified by the obligations and loyalties assumed by the USSR as center of the bloc and communist movement. This factor is most conspicuous in Soviet relations with Communist China, not only because of mutual obligations but because Peipingʼs challenge from the left to Soviet leadership of the communist world imposes upon the Soviet leaders a need to prove their militancy if they are to hold the support of other communist parties. At the heart of the matter are the conflicting national interests of the USSR and Communist China (as defined by the communist rulers) and the difficulty of reconciling the divergent policies and views of these two communist superpowers in a political system based on the proposition that there is a single source of authority and truth.

Pressures arising out of the Sino-Soviet dispute have been an important consideration behind the assertiveness characterizing Soviet foreign policy over the past year. They may well influence Khrushchevʼs behavior at Vienna. Still, Communist China by no means has a veto—whether direct or indirect—over Soviet policies. In recent months, the USSR has continued to pursue policies which, in several specific instances, run directly counter to Chinese Communist interests.

This ambivalence is nowhere better illustrated than at the Geneva test ban negotiations. There is little doubt that Moscowʼs desire to inhibit Communist Chinaʼs acquisition of nuclear weapons has been one important reason why the Soviets have seriously entertained the idea of a supervised nuclear test ban. And there is equally little doubt that Peipingʼs ambition to become a nuclear power is one important reason why the prospects for a test ban agreement have dimmed during the resumed session of the conference.

General Approach

Despite the agreement to keep the Vienna meeting informal, Khrushchev will regard these talks as far more important than a mere probing of President Kennedyʼs views. His own position convinces him of the importance of having the ear of the man in charge, and he will want to impress upon the President his views as to how US-Soviet relations, and the affairs of the world, should be governed. He probably will seek specific agreements, if only to prove to his own audiences that his summit diplomacy pays off. And he will expect that the conference outcome—both the particulars and the general atmosphere—will set the pattern for the style of Soviet diplomacy for some months to come.

Khrushchev will come to Vienna in a confident mood, his confidence swelled by the events in Laos, in Cuba, and in outer space, and by the general growth of Soviet power. But it would be a mistake to overestimate this confidence. Khrushchevʼs vacillation over pressing the Berlin issue during the past year indicates an awareness of the potential dangers involved. He might well feel that a vigorous US response to a sharp Soviet challenge on Berlin would be more likely, not less so, in the wake of Cuba and Laos. There is also convincing evidence of Moscowʼs concern over its exposed position in Cuba, the growing US-Indian rapprochement, and increased US defense expenditures. In addition, Khrushchev has his own problems within the bloc—with Communist China and Albania—and internal problems as well. During the talks, Khrushchev might, for effect, strike a note of anger and bluster—particularly in response to strong language on sensitive issues. But it seems likely that he will generally assume an attitude of reasonable firmness, coupled with a pitch for improved US-Soviet relations.

Khrushchev would prefer that the talks end on a note of accord, that they convey the beginning of a new period of relaxed international tensions. (However, mindful of the Sino-Soviet polemics of last year, Khrushchev will not be prepared to go so far in this regard as he did following his talks with President Eisenhower.) In addition to other, more general, considerations which are cited below, he probably believes that a détente atmosphere would establish a political deterrent of sorts to forceful US action against Cuba, and against Laos in the event the current negotiations break down. He might also hope that this atmosphere would take some of the steam out of an expanding US arms program. And, while not essential, an atmosphere of US- Soviet accord would harmonize with the type of Party Program Khrushchev evidently plans to present at the CPSU Congress next October (which it is anticipated will emphasize consumer welfare, and ultimate communist victory through economic competition and peaceful coexistence).

Khrushchev might be prepared to make some conciliatory gestures for the sake of outward harmony; he might even have “saved up” some lesser concessions for this purpose. But his attachment to harmony will not be without conditions; it will depend to a large extent on the outcome of the talks on the major substantive issues.

Specific Issues

Berlin and Germany. Probably Khrushchevʼs foremost aim will be to obtain some commitment to resume negotiations on Berlin and Germany. To buttress his position, he will probably reaffirm Soviet determination to conclude, if necessary, a separate treaty with the East Germans, and he will not refrain from generalized warnings about the consequences of such action. But he will stress the Soviet Unionʼs desire to “solve” the Berlin question peacefully, through negotiations. Indeed, there is little doubt that negotiations represent Khrushchevʼs preferred approach. In the Soviet view, even a relatively limited negotiated agreement—provided it left the door open for further Soviet action at some future date—would be preferable to the uncertainties and potential dangers of unilateral Soviet action.

Khrushchev will restate the maximum Soviet position; the conclusion of a “two Germanies” peace treaty on the basis of which West Berlin would be converted into a “free city.” If the discussions delve deeper into the substance of the Soviet demands, Khrushchev will probably outline a proposal along the lines of the May 9, 1960,2 aide-memoire, that is, an “interim agreement” containing first-step limitations on Allied rights in West Berlin and designed as well to enhance the international status of the East German regime. He might soften some of these provisions in an effort to induce agreement on another round of negotiations.

It seems likely that Khrushchev will table a formal proposal for convening an East-West summit conference on Berlin and Germany. If Khrushchev meets with a categorical rejection of any further talks on Berlin, this will occasion an angry response which might well set the tone for the rest of the talks. Short of this, there would probably be considerable flexibility in Khrushchevʼs position. He would like to get a firm commitment to hold a conference this year; but he would be willing to settle for general agreement on a conference in the late fall of this year, after the Party Congress in October. Also, he would probably agree to expand the conference agenda to include other issues and he might not insist on holding the conference on the summit level. Khrushchev might even be satisfied with an equivocal US response to the proposal for a conference of this kind.

Disarmament and Security Matters. Khrushchevʼs approach to disarmament and related questions is less predictable. He will almost certainly dwell on these matters at some length, intending to set the stage for the forthcoming US-Soviet bilateral talks on disarmament. He will maintain that the bilateral talks should deal with matters of substance and not just procedure. He will stress, probably with real conviction, the need for disarmament and for the US and Soviet Union to make every effort to avoid a nuclear war. He will also express what is probably a genuine concern over the possible proliferation of nuclear weapons, and the burdens of the arms race. He may use the occasion of privacy to indicate misgivings about Communist Chinaʼs emergence as a nuclear power.

But the specifics of Khrushchevʼs future position are not clear. Regarding Moscowʼs current tactics at the nuclear test ban talks it is unclear whether they are designed merely to strengthen its bargaining position, or represent a firm decision not to conclude a separate agreement on a test ban. Very likely there is some indecision in the current Soviet attitude. If the Soviets have decided against a test ban treaty, it is doubtful that Khrushchev will so indicate directly during the Vienna meeting; he would prefer to have the US assume the onus of breaking off the test ban talks. (There are indications, however, that Khrushchev might argue that a test ban agreement, because of the extensive inspection requirements of the US andUK, will have to be related in some fashion to an agreement or negotiations on broader disarmament issues.) But if this decision has not been made, he may hope to bargain with the President over some of the remaining unresolved differences. In this case, he might agree to modify the Soviet demand for a three-man directorate; there is some evidence that the Soviet delegation to the test ban talks wishes to do so.

In discussing general disarmament, Khrushchev will try to impress upon the President the virtues of the Soviet single-treaty approach to “general and complete disarmament.” He may stick rigidly to the Soviet position that this approach must be the basis for any resumed negotiations on general disarmament. But he may wish to sound out the President about the possibility of negotiations on what he must realize to be a more realistic disarmament package proposal, particularly one geared to the “Nth country” problem. Such a proposal could take the form of a separately negotiable “first-stage” agreement linked in only a declaratory sense to the goal of general and complete disarmament. Or, the Soviets might propose that negotiations on complete disarmament be conducted parallel with talks on other proposals. In any event, Khrushchev would probably be interested in hearing whatever new ideas the US may have concerning measures to check the spread of nuclear weapons.

Peaceful Coexistence. In this first encounter with the President, Khrushchev should be particularly disposed to expound the Soviet philosophy on East-West relations. This will include, at a minimum, the standard line on peaceful coexistence: that the existence of two world systems is an established fact; that these two systems must resolve their differences and prove which is superior through peaceful, economic means, and not by wars between states; that there can be no interference in the affairs of another state (i.e., the West must respect the authority of established communist regimes); but that there can be no cessation of the ideological struggle (i.e., communist subversion), as this is an objective law of history transcending the level of relations between states.

But Khrushchev will go beyond this familiar dialectical rationalization of imperialist intent and self-survival in the nuclear age. He will wish to establish the thesis that the US must draw appropriate conclusions from the growth of Soviet power. In particular, he will maintain that the Westʼs acceptance of the permanence and legitimacy of the satellite regimes of Eastern Europe is a sina qua non of tranquil East-West relations. He will present parallel arguments for a “solution” of the West Berlin problem.

Khrushchev may not choose to bring up the question of Cuba, but if he does, he will probably raise it in connection with these connotations of peaceful coexistence. If so, he will warn the President of the dangers to peace involved in armed intervention in Cuba. But Khrushchev will be careful to avoid any embarrassing, specific commitment to render Castro all-out military support. Instead, he will take the line presented in his letter of April 223 that US intervention in Cuba could justifiably, and might well, provoke similar action by the USSR along its periphery. Realizing Soviet inability to give Castroʼs Cuba effective military support short of running grave risks of nuclear war (which in the final analysis he would have no intention of doing), Khrushchev will concentrate on maximizing the political price for any overt US action.

Khrushchev will probably maintain that as another consequence of the growth of Soviet power, the communist bloc should have a voice equal to that of the West in international councils. The question of the USSRʼs “troika” proposal for administering international organizations will inevitably arise in this connection, or in connection with the test ban talks. Khrushchev might vociferously voice his determination to press this proposal until it is fully accepted. But it would be a mistake to assume that the Soviet position on this question is immovable. The Soviets almost certainly expect this fight to be lengthy—one that will require compromises along the road if it is to be successful. And they will be prepared in the end to abandon their extreme demand if they become convinced that it will antagonize rather than win the neutralists to their side. To date, the Soviets have been notably unsuccessful in securing neutralist support—which is essential—for this proposal.

Laos. Apart from probable cautions concerning the consequences of SEATO intervention in Laos, any points Khrushchev chooses to raise regarding the Laotian situation will be conditioned by the course of negotiations in Geneva and Ban Namone. For this reason, an estimate now of Khrushchevʼs position on this major issue is particularly imprudent.

There is a possibility that Khrushchev might concede one or two non-essential points on the Laotian question (the Soviets have a fair amount of leeway) if he were pressed and felt that such concessions would promote an amicable outcome of the Vienna conference.

Other Issues. On his own initiative, or in response to US initiatives regarding other US-Soviet bilateral issues, Khrushchev might well raise the various standing Soviet proposals for expanded economic relations—in particular, the extension of US credits and most-favored-nation treatment to the USSR.

Unless the talks take an acrimonious turn, Khrushchev might seek to promote an atmosphere of accord by making some conciliatory gesture on a lesser issue. He might agree to a US initiative on bilateral relations, retool some earlier US proposal on bilateral cooperation in scientific or medical endeavors (though probably not in the exploration of outer space), or invite President Kennedy to visit the Soviet Union (though the CPSU Congress and the Berlin question would pose vexing problems of timing to Khrushchev).

Finally, with the eyes of the world on Vienna, Khrushchev might regard the meeting as an appropriate occasion for some dramatic step intended to demonstrate Soviet progress or peaceful intent. This might mean a new space shot; and it is another reason for some Soviet initiative in the field of disarmament.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 1905. Confidential. Drafted by John P. Shaw (RSB) and cleared by John Keppel (RSB), Allan Evans (INR), and Guthrie (SOV).

2 For text of this Soviet proposal, see Foreign Relations, 1958-1960, vol. IX, pp. 395-397.

3 For text, see ibid., 1961-1963, vol. VI, pp. 10-16.





77. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource


Washington, undated.

SUBJECT

Direct White House-Kremlin Telephone



It may be useful, in your meetings with Khrushchev, to mention that we propose to install a direct telephone connection between the State Department and the United States Embassy in Moscow if the Soviet Government has no objection. This telephone would permit direct communication between the heads of the United States and Soviet governments without being ostensibly and exclusively designed for this purpose. Such communication might be useful, in a grave crisis, in reducing the risk of war by miscalculation.

Khrushchev has in the past indicated that he favored a “white telephone” between the United States President and himself, in order to reduce the risk of war by miscalculation. This telephone connection could serve the same purpose, without creating as many political problems.

This discussion might afford you an opportunity to avert to the broader question of the risk of war by miscalculation, and to the fact that this risk may be of some significance during the next few years, when the advantage accruing to a first strike could lead to a pre-emptive strike if one side thought that the other was about to attack.

There is little evidence that this problem has yet figured prominently in Soviet thinking about arms control. It may be useful to get Khrushchev to thinking about the problem and about the need for remedial measures. This might possibly increase the chance of progress in any later discussions of such measures with the Soviets. A sober view of this risk might also help him to appreciate the risks that he will be accepting if he initiates further aggressive moves in the period immediately ahead.



* * *



* Source: Department of State,S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, USSR. Secret. The source text bears no drafting information, but a handwritten notation states that it was signed by Rusk on May 25. Another copy states that it was sent to the White House on the same day. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 1906) A third copy was attached to a memorandum from McCloy to Rusk, May 25, which stated his belief that a direct telephone communication system might reduce “the risk of war by accident or miscalculation.” (Ibid., S/P Files: Lot 67 D 548, Owen Chron)





78. Editorial Note


In a memorandum to President Kennedy, May 26, 1961, Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs Rostow stated that it was his view that “the Viet-Nam situation is extremely dangerous to the peace and that we must push on all fronts to force a deflation of that crisis before it builds to a situation like that in Laos. If it comes to an open battle, the inhibitions on our going in will be less than in Laos; but the challenge to Russia and China will be even greater.” Rostow noted that the United States was working on two fronts: “to build Diemʼs strength” and “to heighten the awareness of the international community about the border issue and to make the ICC the focus of the Laos conference.” But, Rostow continued, “a third front on which we must work is Mr. Khrushchev himself. Thus my efforts to get the town to focus on the role of Viet-Nam in Vienna.” For text of Rostowʼs memorandum, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume I, pages 157-158. As it turned out, Kennedy and Khrushchev scarcely mentioned Viet-Nam during their meetings in Vienna on June 3-4. For records of their conversations, see Documents 83-85 and 87-89.





79. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, May 27, 1961, 2 p.m.

2941. Believe Khrushchev will wish meeting with President to be pleasant one and that he will desire if possible to make some proposal or take position on some problem which would have effect of improving atmosphere and relations. I find it extremely difficult however to imagine what this could be. Some change in attitude on Laos problem is possibility since quite possible Soviets consider neutral Laos at this time desirable from their point of view. Slight possibilityK might intimate to President his concern over Red Chinese policies but think this unlikely in any direct way. Believe K will place main emphasis on general and complete disarmament. Revival of Central European regional security arrangements possibility as well as renewal proposal Warsaw-NATO non-aggression agreement.1

President should be prepared for K exploitation two weaknesses in our position. In any discussion self-determination he will probably bring up our failure carry out elections Viet Nam. In any discussion our concern over expansion Soviet influence Latin America via Cuba he will bring up question our bases and activities on Soviet periphery.

With respect Laos best agreement we can hope to get will apparently rest on shaky foundations. At appropriate time and possibly during Presidentʼs talk would be advisable my opinion attempt put on Khrushchev responsibility for seeing that Laos in fact remains neutral and that this will be gauge of over-all Soviet intentions. Unless and until there is radical deterioration of our relations believe this could have real value as domination Laos itself not major Soviet interest particularly in view Chinese angle.

Believe Soviets will be concerned about moves of administration in arms field and K may well raise this subject contrasting this with his action to demobilize substantial number Soviet troops.

As gesture of goodwill K may respond favorably on subject joint projects in outer space. K likely express appreciation of Presidentʼs action in controlling provocative statements particularly on part military officials.

K may probe our intentions in Congo and on this question believe good case can be made for fact that Soviets have been misinformed and have misjudged our actions. In course conversation K likely rake up U-2 case and may well make gesture release of Powers. Believe caution advisable on former as K might later quote President in order stir up controversy in US. President might take line that flight was major error particularly timing thereof, but that Khrushchev apparently does not realize extent to which Soviet secrecy caused concern over Soviet intentions to those responsible for US security.

Assume President will also have been briefed on subjects of trade, CIA activities, Vershinin visit,2 Korea, and possible eventual Presidential visit to Soviet Union.

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/5-2761. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

1 In a conversation on May 23, primarily devoted to Germany and Berlin, Khrushchev had mentioned the idea of a non-aggression agreement between NATO and the Warsaw Pact. Thompson noted that the proposal had little meaning for the West, but might make it easier for the Soviet Union to concede points on Berlin or atomic testing. Thompson concluded by saying the President should be prepared to knock it down completely or consider such a proposal. (Telegram 2908 from Moscow, May 25; ibid., 611.61/4-2661)

2 The question of a visit to the United States by Soviet Air Marshal Constantin A. Vershinin had been under discussion during the spring of 1961 without resolution. While the Department of State favored it, the Department of Defense in a letter of April 5 stressed the negative aspects of such a visit. (Memorandum from Kohler to Rusk, July 3; ibid., 033.6111/7-361) On July 9 Secretary of Defense McNamara wrote to Rusk saying that the climate for the visit was not right and on the following day Ambassador Thompson was informed that the issue was dead. (Davis letter to Thompson, July 10; ibid., 033.6111-VE/7-1061)





80. Special Background Paper Prepared in the Department of StateSource


Washington, June 1, 1961.

PRESIDENTʼS MEETING WITH KHRUSHCHEV

Vienna, June 3-4, 1961

LINE OF APPROACH TO KHRUSHCHEV

This paper seeks to set forth certain lines of approach both general and specific which would offer the best possibility of getting through to Khrushchev and enhancing in his mind the creditability of United States positions. It seeks to eliminate emphasis on aspects of Soviet policy and its relation with the non-communist world, which experience has shown is without value and apt to be detrimental to the purposes we seek in this meeting.

1. General

The emphasis throughout should be placed upon the Soviet foreign policy in its national aspects and any ideological topics or reference to the general threat of communism in the world should not be dealt with per se but as a function of and in relation to Soviet state policy.

The United States and the Soviet Union as chief protagonists in the present world-wide struggle, find themselves in antagonistic confrontation in regard to every international political problem. This is most certainly the Soviet view which treats every issue as a battle in a continuing struggle in which negotiation is not sought by the Soviet Government for the purpose of solution of a given problem, but as a weapon in political warfare to obtain a Soviet or communist victory at the expense of the non-communist world.

There is only one major subject on which there would appear to be a coincident of interest between the United States and the Soviet Union, and that is on the assumed common desire of both to avoid nuclear war. Community of interest on this point should be the basic and starting point of the entire approach to Khrushchev. On the basis of this common desire to avoid nuclear war, the United States and the Soviet Union, as the two leading powers in the world, have an enormous responsibility in the matter of the preservation of peace. While recognizing that we will not find any genuine common ground in regard to most if not all of the international issues in dispute, the manner in which these disagreements are handled in practice should be approached in the light of our common interest in avoiding nuclear war and in our great responsibility as world powers.

2. War

It should be emphasized to Khrushchev that the artificial distinction between the three categories of war, contained in his January sixth speech and the eighty-one Party document, is inherently artificial and dangerous. The thesis that certain kinds of war can be segregated out from others is a most dangerous thesis. In reality, war is war and does not lend itself to such tidy compartmentalization. Any form of armed action supported by a great power carries with it the obvious danger of spreading, and thereby moving from one category to another. Support by the Soviet Union of “wars of national liberalization”—an extremely flexible definition at best—is entirely incompatible with the professed Soviet desire for peaceful co-existence.

While Khrushchev will probably not be too receptive to anything to do with the United Nations, nonetheless the only ground rules for co-existence which exist in a jointly agreed document are in the Charter itself, which specifically binds its signatories to refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force, except in individual or collective self-defense, and to settle their international disputes by peaceful means. It should be pointed out that the attempt to advance the communist cause by small internal wars, i.e. wars of national liberation, is a certain path towards world war if consistently followed, in the state of the world today. This is the logic of any such Soviet position and no amount of tactical skill or self-deception could obscure this reality.

The United States is a great power, and the Soviet Union is a great power. The United States is very cognizant of this fact and does not and will not seek to confront a great power, i.e. the Soviet Union, with a series of intolerable choices which would involve either the acceptance of international political defeat, or the recourse to war as a means of averting it. The Soviet Union, for its part, should recognize the same reality in regard to the United States. Quite apart from the subjective will of its leaders, it is not realistic to believe that a great power can accept a succession of attempted or actual political defeats without at some point in the process having recourse to its great power. While concentrating on the responsibilities and interests of the Soviet Union as a great power, at some point in the discussion the duality of Soviet operations in the foreign field should be brought out, but only, as indicated above, as the function of or in relation to its national policy. Reference should be made, in this connection, to the incompatibility between the public utterances of Khrushchev as the leader of the Soviet State and the positions taken and the views expressed in his January sixth speech as head of the dominant party in the world communist movement, with particular reference in the latter document to the violent and distorted statements of hostility towards the United States as a country. On specific issues, the following line of approach is suggested: a) Germany and Berlin

Stemming from the general considerations outlined above, it could be said to Khrushchev that he should not expect that the United States and its allies would accept the political defeat involved in the loss or weakening of their existing position in Berlin. We have firm obligations and solemn commitments in this matter and to give them up or to permit them to be eroded would constitute a political defeat in Europe, which would be quite intolerable and unacceptable to a great power, no matter what the consequences. It should be pointed out that the entire situation in Germany is abnormal, that that of Berlin as a city is abnormal, and that we cannot accept the characterization of one part of an abnormal situation as its sole abnormality. The situation in Germany has existed since the end of the war, and while unsatisfactory to all concerned, any change would have to be an improvement, or at least no worse, from the point of view of all concerned—the Western allies, the people of West Berlin, as well as the Soviet and East German side. In a situation as delicately balanced as the situation in Germany, the side which seeks to change it to its advantage and to the detriment of the other side is the one that assumes the responsibility for the risks to peace inherent in such a course of action.

The standard Soviet argument concerning the necessity of doing away with the “vestiges of the war” is obviously a formalistic statement of the position and cannot be accepted. The real vestige of the war to be corrected is the division of Germany, but since this realistically does not seem to be an immediate possibility, the delicate balance should not be upset. If ways of improving the situation without detriment to any of the parties concerned could be found, we would be prepared to consider any such suggestion. The proposal for a “free West Berlin” does not satisfy these criteria, since it would appear to make very little sense, even from a Soviet point of view, unless it brought them certain advantages with corresponding disadvantages to the Western Powers and the people of West Berlin, which would not be tolerable for the reasons given above.

One possibility might be to return to the ʼ44 agreement and to see if the statute then outlined for all Berlin could not be reinstituted with certain agreed modifications. One other course of action would be, if Khrushchev feels he must proceed with a peace treaty with the GDR, to do so leaving unchanged the obligations of the Four Powers in regard to West Berlin. We would not subscribe to such a peace treaty, but its conclusion leaving West Berlin in statu quo might be a possibility.



a) Disarmament

It would be well to focus the disarmament discussion on the current test ban negotiations since these are the only actual negotiations in progress in this field which, theoretically at least, should offer a prospect for agreement. The chief obstacle for agreement at the present time is the retrogression by the Soviet side in introducing the doctrine of a Three-Power Committee with individual veto power in place of a single administrator selected for his objectivity as an international civil servant.

Khrushchev should be questioned on this point as to how any such mechanism could possibly operate, since a veto power would render ineffective, and indeed ridiculous, the entire concept of an objective system of international verification and control. He should be pushed hard to justify the workability of any such mechanism. Care, however, should be exercised that this point is not built up to a degree whereby a Soviet retreat from this position might be utilized by them to justify major concessions on our part in other aspects of the test ban talks still in dispute.

If, however, Khrushchev sticks firmly to his insistence on the troika and endeavors to transfer it into the general field of disarmament, he should be told that there seems to be little prospect of any fruitful progress in this entire field as long as this position is maintained. However, in all likelihood, he will not seek to extend the troika principle into general disarmament, but is more apt to stress the standard Soviet position that when disarmament is fully or even substantially achieved, the Soviet Government would accept any form of inspection. If he makes this latter point clear, then the discussion of general disarmament should follow along the lines of our position paper (PMK-B/9).1





Conclusion

In general, the impression we would desire to leave on Khrushchev is first of all one of utmost seriousness in regard to the current world situation; the desire of the United States to find means to handle our disagreements in such a way as to avoid war and that, to this end, realistic and responsible action on the part of the Soviet Union will be matched by equal responsible and realistic action on the part of the United States; that world peace cannot be preserved by an attempt to inflict political defeats upon great powers and our reciprocal actions should be governed by some form of ground rules in order to avoid the type of actions which can set off an automatic chain of events leading to the end that both countries desire to avoid.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 1906. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Bohlen.

1 Not printed. (Ibid., CF 1905)





81. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to Secretary of State Rusk, at ParisSource


Belgrade, June 2, 1961, 3 p.m.

66. Washington personal for Acting Secretary. Paris personal for Secretary.Deptel 830, repeated Paris 5140.1 Much appreciate suggestion I send President my views in connection with Vienna meeting but fear there is little I can say that would be helpful. Am not informed as to background considerations that led to arrangement of meeting at this time and am not entirely certain as to underlying expectations and hopes with which we are approaching it.

I do not share frequently stated view that Khrushchev needs to be personally assured at this time of our determination to resist any overt encroachment that would bring into play our obligation under UN or existing alliances. He is well acquainted with our situation in these respects and knows that we will not hesitate to react with determination if challenged in this manner. He does not, I am sure, propose to offer us such challenges, if he can help it, particularly such as would threaten to embroil us directly with Soviet forces. Whatever pressures he may be planning to exert on US in Berlin in coming period, they are not likely to be ones which, in his opinion, would present us with an overt and clear challenge of this nature.

It would not be useful for me to attempt to enter at this date into discussion of our positions on those great questions, such as Germany, Berlin, Korea-Japan, et cetera, in which Russian interests and our own are both normally involved, which constitute in my view center and source of deepest tensions. On other hand, I am skeptical of usefulness of any detailed discussion with Khrushchev of peripheral situations such as Laos, Cuba, and Iran. Soviet responsibility as a rule is not formally involved in these situations; and where Soviet policies have contributed to their exacerbation, these have been only one of many factors.

It seems to me evident that decisions of eighty-one parties meeting in Moscow last fall rested on agreed calculation, as between Russians and Chinese, that Americaʼs world position and influence could probably be effectively shattered in coming period, and the NATO group politically isolated by series of sharp indirect political pressures, ruthless exploitation of colonial issue, and all-out propaganda attack. I think it could usefully be emphasized to Khrushchev that a political program founded on such calculation is not only wholly inconsistent with any attempt to improve international atmosphere but could scarcely be expected to achieve completion without at some point creating situations where our military obligations would become involved and complications created beyond anyoneʼs control. It could be justly put to Khrushchev that inflammatory and insulting language in which recent Soviet statements have been cast constitutes alone a grievous disservice to any efforts to improve world situation and plays directly into hands of those who view with disfavor or despair the prospect of any improvement in Soviet-American relations.

In light of above, it seems to me general tenor of Presidentʼs approach could well be that (1) basic political problems dividing us from Russians and Chinese in European and East-Asian areas, outside of disarmament, are of such difficulty that much time and patient preparation of public opinion would be involved before any practical negotiating approach could be made to their solutions; (2) we would like to start on the long task of cultivating a suitable atmosphere and climate of opinion in which to tackle these questions; but (3) it is idle to attempt this in face of the impressions recently created by violent Russian statements, by obvious attempt to destroy United Nations Secretariat, and by equally obvious effort to exploit colonial and other issues with a view to blackening American image before world public, distorting American action and intentions, and sowing hatred and mistrust of American people.

Though aware that my views in this respect are at variance with those of many prominent American students of Soviet scene within and without government, I have still not seen evidence to convince me that Khrushchev is an absolute dictator of policy within the Communist orbit or that he does not have to take into account views of other people and parties. Do not believe that hints transmitted to us from time to time along this line (most recently to me personally by Soviet Ambassador here, yesterday) are wholly without substance. I think Khrushchev has, for various reasons, a greater interest in relaxation of tensions between Russia and the West than have his Chinese allies; that it was not without inner hesitations and conflicts that he was led last fall to accept the aggressive Chinese line on spreading of socialism by means short of all-out war; and that he could well use some help from outside in arguing for a somewhat more moderate and prudent course on part of communist parties. For this reason, I hope his personal position, and possible effects of Vienna talks on it, will not be left out of our consideration as we plan our approach to the meeting.

From the particular vantage point of Belgrade, it is evident that noncommitted world now stand at very crucial parting of the ways. If some relaxation of over-all world tensions is not achieved, it seems to me very likely that there will be serious split between that group of unaligned nations which is violently anti-Western and anti-American and that which would like to preserve decent relations with the West. This issue may be at stake in forthcoming Cairo meeting. To extent that Vienna meeting creates impression of improvement of Soviet-Western relations, Yugoslavia, whose influence together with that of Nehru2 may be decisive in determining trends within the nonaligned group, will be cautioned against association with anti-Western tendencies. If, however, no improvement in East-West relations is achieved at this time, position of Yugoslavia and other neutrals may be expected to become more difficult; and in this case, as things now stand, there would be small hope of drawing this country generally to the pro-Western camp.

Kennan



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/5-3161. Confidential; Niact. Also sent to the Department as telegram 981, which is the source text.

1 Telegram 830, May 31, asked Kennan to send the President his advice, suggestions, and analysis for the meeting with Khrushchev. (Ibid., 611.61/6-261)

2 Jawaharlal Nehru, Prime Minister of India.





82. Editorial Note


Following his meetings with President De Gaulle in Paris, President Kennedy arrived in Vienna at 10:45 a.m. on June 3, 1961. After a ceremonial meeting with Austrian President Schaerf the President and Secretary of State went to the U.S. Embassy residence for the first meeting with Chairman Khrushchev, who had arrived in Vienna the previous day. This meeting lasted until 1:30 p.m. when the President hosted a luncheon for the Chairman at the residence. Following lunch the President again met with Khrushchev, while Rusk and Foreign Minister Gromyko met separately. These sessions ended shortly before 7 p.m. in order to allow Kennedy and the Chairman to prepare for a State dinner given by the Austrian Government and attended by the First Ladies. Records of the two formal meetings, the luncheon discussion, and Ruskʼs conversation with Gromyko are printed as Documents 83-86.

On June 4 the President and the Chairman met at the Soviet Chancery from 10:15 to 1 p.m. during which the President was given aide-memoires on disarmament and Germany and Berlin. Following lunch at the Soviet Chancery, Kennedy and Khrushchev met again at 3:15 for about 15 minutes. For records of the two meetings and the discussion at lunch, see Documents 87-89. At the conclusion of the meeting Secretary Rusk returned to Paris to brief President De Gaulle and to report to the North Atlantic Council. The President stopped in London for a similar briefing of Prime Minister Macmillan, while Assistant Secretary of State Kohler went to Bonn to brief Chancellor Adenauer.

U.S. memoranda of the conversations between Kennedy and Khrushchev were drafted by Alexander Akalovsky, the Presidentʼs interpreter. These records are presented here. Following each meeting the U.S. delegation also prepared summaries that were transmitted to Washington. These telegrams are identified in the footnotes. After the Summit Conference the Bureau of European Affairs of the Department of State prepared a 47-page “Transcript of the Vienna Meeting,” which closely follows Akalovskyʼs drafts with minor errors and repetitions corrected. A copy of this transcript is in Department of State, Central Files, 711.11/KE/6-461.

The only personal record by a participant in all the meetings is Khrushchevʼs The Last Testament, pages 492-501, and it is incomplete and selective. Ambassador Bohlen, who participated in all but one of the meetings, has also presented a personal account in Witness to History, pages 480-482. The Presidentʼs Press Secretary, Pierre Salinger, describes some of the conversation at the luncheons in With Kennedy, pages 175-180. Two other accounts based on reading the official records also bear note. Sorensen in Kennedy, pages 543-550, gives details of some aspects of the meetings indicating that he read the memoranda of the conversations, while Beschloss, The Crisis Years, pages 192-224 captures both the essence of the meetings and the atmosphere of the summit conference.





83. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Vienna, June 3, 1961, 12:45 p.m.

SUBJECT

Vienna Meeting Between The President and Chairman Khrushchev



PARTICIPANTS

US The President

The Secretary

Ambassador Bohlen

Ambassador Thompson

EUR—Mr. Kohler

D—Mr. Akalovsky, (Interpreting)





USSR Chairman Khrushchev

Mr. Dobrynin, Chief, American Countries Division, USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Ambassador Menshikov

Mr. Sukhodrev, Interpreter,USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs





The President said he wanted to express his pleasure at seeing Chairman Khrushchev and recalled his earlier meeting in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee during Mr. Khrushchevʼs visit in the United States. The President said that he had talked to the Soviet Foreign Minister and the Soviet Ambassador and that he was extremely interested in discussing at least to a certain extent matters affecting the relations between the two countries. He said he hoped that during these two days a better understanding of the problems confronting us could be reached, and that the conversations would be useful.

Mr. Khrushchev said that he also wished the conversations to be useful. He remembered the meeting in the Foreign Relations Committee and said that the President had been late for that meeting, so that there was no opportunity to say much except hello and goodbye. He also recalled that he had told the President that he had heard of him as a young and promising man in politics. He was glad now to meet him as President.

The President replied that he also remembered this remark and said that Mr. Khrushchev had told him that he was very youthful in appearance. The President remarked that he must have aged since then.

Mr. Khrushchev wondered whether he had really said that. Normally he did not say such things because young people want to look older and older people like to look younger. He said that he had had a similar experience because in his youth he had looked much younger than his age and had regarded it as offensive if someone made a mistake about his age. However, he obtained a kind of mandate of old age by beginning to gray at the age of twenty-two. In any event, if he could he would be happy to share his years with the President or change places with him.

The President stated that as President, bearing heavy responsibilities just as Mr. Khrushchev as leader of his country, he was concerned about how it would be possible for the two countries—allied with other countries, having different political and social systems, and competing with each other in different parts of the world—to find during his Presidency ways and means of not permitting situations where the two countries would be committed to actions involving their security or endangering peace, to secure which is our basic objective.

Mr. Khrushchev replied that the Soviet Union had endeavored for a long time to develop friendly relations with the United States and its allies. Such relations would bring about peace and would be in the interest of the two countries and the world at large. At the same time the Soviet Union did not wish to reach agreement with the U.S. at the expense of other peoples because such agreement would not mean peace. Several basic questions must be resolved. Without their solution sources of tension between the two countries would continue to exist. Such solutions are all the more necessary because the Soviet Union believes that the situations of the two countries do not impel them to clash with each other. Mr. Khrushchev said that what he had in mind was primarily the economic field, which was basic. The United States is a rich country and has all the necessary resources. So far, the Soviet Union has been poorer than the United States and it recognizes that fact. However, the Soviet Union will develop—not at U.S. expense, because it has no predatory intentions, but rather by developing its own human and natural resources. Mr. Khrushchev said that he did not want to conceal that the USSR was challenging the United States; it wants to become richer than the United States and this is not just a desire but there is some real foundation for such a development. The U.S. may not agree with this but then the U.S. can also develop further. In any event, it is necessary to suppress any feeling of envy, if it exists. The Soviet Union does not wish to stand in the way of U.S. economic development.

The President remarked that he was impressed with the rate of growth in the Soviet Union and said that this was surely a source of satisfaction to Mr. Khrushchev, as it was to us.

Mr. Khrushchev said that the West and the U.S. as its leader must recognize one fact: Communism exists and has won its right to develop. Such recognition should be de facto and not de jure. United States policy under Dulles excluded such possibility; Mr. Dulles had based his policy on the premise of liquidation of the Communist system. This struggle against Communism would of course never lead to the establishment of good relations between our two countries. The existence of the Soviet system does not depend on the United States just as the existence of the capitalist system does not depend on the Soviet Union. Relations between our two countries could develop only if this fact is recognized. Mr. Khrushchev said that he had raised this point not for the purpose of arguing. He would not try to convince the President about the advantages of Communism, just as the President should not waste his time to convert him to capitalism. Mr. Khrushchev repeated that the recognition he had referred to should be de facto.

The President said that Mr. Khrushchevʼs remarks raised a very important problem. Mr. Khrushchev disagreed with the interpretation of the policy ascribed by him to Dulles, who, according to Mr. Khrushchev, had sought to eliminate Communist control in areas under such control, and says that this represents failure to recognize Communism as a fact in that area. His own interpretation of the situation was, the President continued, that the Soviet Union was seeking to eliminate free systems in areas that are associated with us. So while objecting to efforts directed at eliminating Communism in areas under the Communist system, Mr. Khrushchev appears to believe that it is appropriate to exert efforts to eliminate free systems. This is a matter of very serious concern to us.

Mr. Khrushchev said that this was an incorrect interpretation of Soviet policy. The Soviet Union is against implanting its policy in other states. As a matter of fact, this would be an impossible task. What the Soviet Union says is that Communism will triumph. This is a different proposition because it represents a teaching, a scientific analysis of social development. The United States may not accept this teaching, but the Soviet Union proceeds from one assumption alone, namely, that any change in the social system should depend on the will of the peoples themselves. The Soviet Union is for change. It believes that it is now in the political arena and it is challenging the capitalist system just as that system had challenged feudalism in the past. The French Revolution was the first instance where such challenge was made. The response to the French Revolution was the creation of the Holy Alliance, which failed, primarily because Russia was its leader. In those days Russia was a feudalist state, but now it is a Communist country. The Soviet Union has proposed general and complete disarmament. This is a manifestation of its intention not to use arms. The Soviet Union believes that human minds will develop and it believes in its system, just as the President believes in its own system. In any event this is not a matter for argument, much less for war.

The President said that he believed that the most important problem for the two sides was to have some understanding of their respective views on the differences that exist. Such understanding would explain the actions of the two sides as distinct from what their interpretation might be otherwise. Our position is that people should have free choice. In some cases minorities seize control in areas associated with us, minorities which do not express the will of the people. Such groups associate themselves with the USSR and act against the interests of the United States. The USSR believes that this is a historical inevitability. This is a matter of concern to us because we do not believe that this is a historical inevitability. This brings in conflict the USSR as center of Communist power and the US as center of our power. Thus the problem is how to conduct this disagreement in areas where we have interests without direct confrontation of the two countries and thus to serve the interests of our people. The President said that his interest here was to explain our concern about what Mr. Khrushchev says is an inevitability. We cannot regard this to be an inevitability. We believe in our system just as Mr. Khrushchev believes in his.

Mr. Khrushchev replied that this was correct but wondered whether the United States wanted to build a dam preventing the development of human mind and conscience. To do such a thing is not in manʼs power. The Spanish Inquisition burned people who disagreed with it but ideas did not burn and eventually came out as victors. Thus if we start struggling against ideas, conflicts and clashes between the two countries will be inevitable. Once an idea is born it cannot be chained or burned. History should be the judge in the argument between ideas. People will judge capitalism and Communism by the results of their respective efforts. If capitalism insures better living for people it will win. Conversely, if Communism achieves this goal, it will be the winner. Mr. Khrushchev said that he wanted to emphasize that what he had in mind was victory of ideas, not a military victory. In any event, the military aspect has become unimportant today.

The President expressed his belief that his and Mr. Khrushchevʼs obligation to the peoples of the US and the USSR respectively was to have this struggle for ideas, which is part of our times, conducted without affecting the vital security interests of the two countries. The Soviet Union as a national entity has certain essential interests. The same is true of the United States. The struggle in other areas should be conducted in a way which would not involve the two countries directly and would not affect their national interest or prestige. As Mr. Khrushchev knows from history—and this, the President said, he had discussed with Gromyko—it is very easy to involve countries in certain actions. We might get involved in a struggle which would affect the peace of the world and the interests of our peoples.

Mr. Khrushchev said that he hoped that he had misunderstood the Presidentʼs remarks. He wanted to seek clarification of whether the President wanted to place the responsibility for the development of Communist ideas on the Soviet Union. Did the President want to say that Communism should exist only in those countries that are already Communist and that if Communist ideas should develop the U.S. would be in conflict with the USSR? Such an understanding of the situation is incorrect, and if there really is such an understanding, conflicts will be inevitable. Ideas do not belong to any one nation and they cannot be retracted. Marx and Engels were the originators of Communist ideas; even if the originators of ideas were to reject their own ideas, the ideas once born would continue to develop. There is no immunization against ideas. Mr. Khrushchev continued by saying that if he should renounce Communism—something he has no intention of doing—his friends would exclude him from their group but the idea would continue developing. De facto recognition of the two main ideas—although some other ideas may develop—is essential for the peaceful development of the world. Ideas should be propagated without the use of arms or interference in the internal affairs of other states. If Communist ideas should spread in other countries, theUSSR would be happy, just as the US would be glad if capitalist ideas were to spread. In any event, the spread of ideas should depend on peoples alone. Ideas should not be borne on bayonets or on missile warheads, bayonets now being obsolete. This would mean war and the USSR does not accept such a situation. Mr. Khrushchev said that he would guarantee that the USSR would not exceed the bounds of this professed policy, namely, that ideas would not be imposed by war.

The President interjected that Mao Tse-tung had said that power was at the end of the rifle.

Mr. Khrushchev replied that he did not believe that Mao Tse-tung could have said this. Mao Tse-tung is a Marxist and Marxists have always been against war. A vivid example of this position is the fact that during the Russo-Japanese war Plekhanov, leader of Russian Social Democrats in those days, embraced Kotoyama, leader of the Japanese Socialists, as a sign of friendship between peoples. Kotoyama was a prominent leader of Japanese Socialists and he died in the USSR in 1935 or 1936 as a very old man.

The President said that he understood Mr. Khrushchevʼs point of view but that he was anxious to give him our views. Mr. Khrushchevʼs belief in the inevitability of the spread of Communism is well known. The President said that he would try to explain how we view the situation so as to make it easier to understand our actions and motivations. Our basic objective should be preservation of peace and if we fail in that effort both our countries will lose. Our two countries possess modern weapons while other countries do not posses such weapons. West Europe suffered a great deal during the war but now it has risen again and is prospering. However, if our two countries should miscalculate they would lose for a long time to come. Thus, his own views notwithstanding, Mr. Khrushchev should consider our views on the development of the world so that the chances of peace should be increased and our peoples would not stand a loss. His own main ambition, the President said, is to secure peace.

Mr. Khrushchev responded by saying that he had often seen similar statements in the US press. Miscalculation, he said, was a very vague term. However, it looked to him as if the United States wanted the USSR to sit like a school boy with his hands on his desk. The Soviet Union supports its ideas and holds them in high esteem. It cannot guarantee that these ideas will stop at its borders. He said that he did not quite understand what kind of conditions, in US view, the USSR should maintain in order to ensure peace. He wondered what the meaning of the term “miscalculation” was. He said the Soviet Union would defend its vital interests and the United States might regard some of such acts as “miscalculation”. However, the USSR believes in defending its interests. Moreover, the same term could be used by the USSR with regard to some actions by the other side. In any event, the West has been using this term much too often. The USSR is not a militant country and it does not want war, but it cannot be intimated either. To use this term “miscalculation”, Mr. Khrushchev said, it would be irresponsible to make a miscalculation, regardless of which of the two sides did it. Both would lose equally and would be punished equally. Modern war would not be like World War I or II. The USSR appreciates this fact just as the United States does. The term “miscalculation” should be stored away, particularly since its use by the West does not affect the USSR at all.

The President said that he wanted to explain what he meant by “miscalculation”. He said it was impossible to predict the next move of any country. As Mr. Khrushchev knows, history shows that it is extremely difficult to make a judgment as to what other countries would do next. The Soviet Union has surely experienced this, just as the United States has. Western Europe has suffered a great deal because of its failure to foresee with precision what other countries would do. Such failure has not been limited to other countries alone. Just recently, the President continued, he had mentioned certain misjudgments by the United States. An example of such misjudgments were certain actions by the United States in connection with the Korean situation, where the United States had failed to foresee what the Chinese would do. However, misjudgment can be avoided and the purpose of this meeting is to introduce precision in judgments of the two sides and to obtain a clearer understanding of where we are going.

Mr. Khrushchev said he agreed with this and this was how he too regarded the meeting. The purpose of this conversation was not to worsen but to improve the relations between the two countries and if the President and himself should succeed in this effort, the expenses incurred in connection with the meeting would be well justified. On the other hand, if they should fail, not only the expenses would not be justified, but—what is much more important—the hopes of the peoples would be frustrated.

At this point the group moved to the dining room for lunch.



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, Presidentʼs Office Files, USSR. Secret. Drafted by Akalovsky. The meeting was held at the American Ambassadorʼs residence. According to another copy this memorandum of conversation was approved by the White House on June 23. (Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 1901) A summary of this conversation was transmitted in Secto 16 from Vienna, June 4. (Ibid., Central Files, 600.001/6-461)





84. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Vienna, June 3, 1961.

SUBJECT

Vienna Meeting Between The President and Chairman Khrushchev



PARTICIPANTS:

Listed on Page 4



During lunch the conversation was mostly of a social nature. The points of significance that emerged were the following: (1) During the discussion of the history of the Laotian Conference, Mr. Khrushchev said that the conference had found a good solution for Viet Nam and said that perhaps the same would happen this time.

(2) In discussing agricultural problems in the Soviet Union, Mr. Khrushchev stressed the need for a great increase in their chemical production so as to ensure sufficient quantities of chemical fertilizers, herbicides, etc. He also mentioned that about 25 to 30% of the USSRʼs population were engaged in agriculture. He also implied that he had direct channels of communication to Mr. Garst, who had denied a statement Secretary Rusk had made to Mr. Gromyko about the development of dwarf corn in the United States.

(3) With reference to Gagarinʼs flight,2 Mr. Khrushchev said that prior to the launching there were many unknown factors, particularly with regard to the psychological effects of such flights on human beings. Prior to the flight there was some fear of entrusting Gagarin with the controls of the space craft. Nevertheless, he was given the controls but the instructions were coded and sealed in an envelope. The code was developed in such a way as to make sure that only a normal person could decode it. Now everything is known: Gagarin has made his flight, and he sang songs while in orbit.

(4) With regard to the possibility of launching a man to the moon, Mr. Khrushchev said that he was cautious because of the military aspect of such flights. In response to the Presidentʼs inquiry whether the US and the USSR should go to the moon together, Mr. Khrushchev first said no, but then said “all right, why not?”

(5) In raising his glass to the health of his guest, the President expressed satisfaction that Mr. Khrushchev was here at the American Embassy. He recalled Mr. Khrushchevʼs visit to the United States and expressed appreciation that he had come to see us and learn about the way our people live. The President also said that we admired Mr. Khrushchevʼs vigor and energy he devotes to the cause in which he believes and to his country. While we may not always agree with his views, we appreciate his influence on the matters affecting the relations between our two countries. The President expressed the hope that during these two days a better understanding of world events could be reached. The President also recalled that his predecessor had welcomed Mr. Khrushchev to the United States and he said that it was a privilege for him to welcome Mr. Khrushchev here on this small piece of the U.S. Finally, he expressed the hope that the conversations would be fruitful and said that it was a matter of personal satisfaction for him to be able to welcome Mr. Khrushchev at this time.

(6) In response to the toast, Mr. Khrushchev expressed the hope that wisdom would be found to ensure good relations between the two countries and throughout the world. He said he did not want to exaggerate the role assigned to the two countries by history, but in their pursuit of peace the two countries could stop, by joint effort, any war that might be started by some other country. The respective views of the two countries were well known and the purpose here was not to persuade each other. However, the Soviet people were also human beings and they wanted their generations to live and prosper. Mr. Khrushchev said that he had had the pleasure of visiting the United States at former President Eisenhowerʼs invitation. He said he respected Eisenhower and expressed regret at the unhappy development of their relations. The U-2 flight had been the main cause of such a development and he was almost sure that Eisenhower had not known about the flight. Nevertheless, Eisenhower decided to take the responsibility for this flight in the spirit of chivalry. The flight was an effort on the part of the people who wanted to worsen the relations between the two countries and they achieved their goal. Mr. Khrushchev expressed his regret that he could not receive Eisenhower in the USSR and said he hoped to receive the President when time was ripe. The road for such a visit was open. The President would be a welcome guest if he should wish to come. However, one note of caution was in order. Mr. Nixon had thought that just by showing the Soviet people a dream kitchen, a kitchen that certainly did not exist nor would ever exist in the US, he would convert the Soviet people to capitalism. Mr. Khrushchev apologized for referring to Nixon, a citizen of the United States, but said that only Nixon could have thought of such nonsense. Mr. Khrushchev continued by saying the President would be free to see everyone in the Soviet Union and to get the feel of their life. TheUSSR is not afraid for its system. It believes in it and it rests on a sound basis. Mr. Khrushchev said he had always been an optimist and had always believed in the wisdom of man. However, the commercial language of bargaining is sometimes used in dealings with the Soviet Union. The USSR is told “you give in and we will give in”, but “what can I concede?” Mr. Khrushchev asked. Concession of even a portion, a lump of peace would mean no peace at all. The USSR is blamed for Communist movements in various countries. But, Mr. Khrushchev said, he did not know even who their leaders were. He is too busy at home. Marx and Engels are the originators of Communism and if anyone is to blame for Communism, it should be the Germans. True, the USSR has adopted Marxism and in that sense perhaps it should share the blame. Mr. Khrushchev said this was just a joke and that, in a more serious vein, he wanted to say that the Soviet people respect the American people. They admire their successes. As a matter of fact, after the Revolution the level of US technology and science was set as a goal for the USSR. American technicians were invited to the Soviet Union, and such people as Colonel Cooper, who had helped build Dneprestroi, and Mr. Morgan, an engineer who participated in the construction of the Moscow subway, were awarded Soviet decorations. Mr. Morgan visited the Soviet Union later and said that he was building housing in Turkey. However, it was known to the Soviet Union that in fact he was building bases there, but this is a matter for his own conscience. Ideologically, our two countries are at opposite poles but this should not prevent them from ensuring a better future for their peoples. Mr. Khrushchev then raised his glass to the Presidentʼs health and said that he envied the President because he was so young. Mr. Khrushchev said that if he were the Presidentʼs age, he would devote even more energy to his cause. Nevertheless, even at 67, he was not renouncing the competition. Mr. Khrushchev concluded by saying that he and the President had met well and that he was sure that they would part even better.





PARTICIPANTS:

United States The President

The Secretary

Ambassador Matthews

Ambassador Thompson

Mr. Bundy

Ambassador Bohlen

EUR—Mr. Kohler

Mr. Nitze

Mr. Salinger

D—Mr. Akalovsky (interpreting)





USSR Chairman Khrushchev

Foreign Minister Gromyko

Ambassador Avilov, Ambassador to Austria

Ambassador Menshikov

Mr. Troyanovsky, Personal Assistant to Chairman Khrushchev

Mr. Dobrynin, Chief, American Countries Division, USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Mr. Molochkov, Chief of Protocol, USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Mr. Kharlamov, Chief, Press Division, USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Mr. Pahlin, Deputy Chief of the German-Austrian Division of the Soviet Foreign Ministry

Mr. Sukhodrev, Interpreter,USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs





* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, Presidentʼs Office Files, USSR. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved by the White House on June 23. The meeting was held at the American Ambassadorʼs residence.

2 A reference to Major Yuri Gagarinʼs orbital flight of the earth in April.





85. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Vienna, June 3, 1961, 3 p.m.

SUBJECT

Vienna Meeting Between The President and Chairman Khrushchev



PARTICIPANTS

US The President

D—Mr. Akalovsky (Interpreting)





USSR Chairman Khrushchev

Mr. Sukhodrev, Interpreter,USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs





After lunch the President invited Mr. Khrushchev for a short walk in the garden.1 While in the garden, the President asked Mr. Khrushchev how he managed to make himself available for such prolonged conversations as, for example he had had, with Senator Humphrey and Walter Lippmann.2 The President said he understood that no one had interrupted the Chairman during those meetings. As far as he was concerned, the President continued, his schedule was very crowded and he was constantly wanted on the telephone, so that it was very difficult for him to have time for lengthy uninterrupted meetings.

Mr. Khrushchev replied that it was true that he had indeed had prolonged uninterrupted meetings with Senator Humphrey and Lippmann. The reason why he had time for such meetings was that the Soviet Government had been decentralized to the extent that administrative functions had been transferred to the governments of the individual republics, while the government of the Union retained the responsibility for over-all planning.

The President remarked that our system of several branches of government involved contacts and consultations between the President and the various branches, and that this was a time consuming process.

To this, Mr. Khrushchev replied: “Well, why donʼt you switch to our system?”

The President then invited Mr. Khrushchev for a private talk inside.

The President referred to the conversation before lunch3 and said that some of the problems faced by the two countries had been discussed. Now he wanted to come back to the general thesis. While Laos was one problem now under discussion, others might come up in the future. Thus, it would be useful to discuss the general problem underlying the situation and consider the specifics perhaps later. In addition to Laos, which had already been discussed, such specifics might include Germany and nuclear tests. The President then recalled Mr. Khrushchevʼs earlier reference to the death of feudalism. He said he understood this to mean that capitalism was to be succeeded by Communism. This was a disturbing situation because the French Revolution, as the Chairman well knew, had caused great disturbances and upheavals throughout Europe. Even earlier the struggle between Catholics and Protestants had caused the Hundred Year War. Thus it is obvious that when systems are in transition we should be careful, particularly today when modern weapons are at hand. Whatever the result of the present competition—and no one can be sure what it will be—both sides should act in such a way as to prevent them from coming into direct contact and thus prejudicing the establishment of lasting peace, which, the President said, was his ambition.

Mr. Khrushchev interjected that he fully understood this.

Even the Russian Revolution had produced convulsions, even intervention by other countries, the President continued. He then said that he wanted to explain what he meant by “miscalculation”. In Washington, he has to attempt to make judgments of events, judgments which may be accurate or not; he made a misjudgment with regard to the Cuban situation. He has to attempt to make judgments as to what the USSR will do next, just as he is sure that Mr. Khrushchev has to make judgments as to the moves of the US. The President emphasized that the purpose of this meeting was to introduce greater precision in these judgments so that our two countries could survive this period of competition without endangering their national security.

Mr. Khrushchev responded by saying that this was a good idea and that this was what he called demonstration of patience and understanding. However, judging by some of the Presidentʼs statements, the Soviet Union understood the situation differently. The US believes that when people want to improve their lot, this is a machination by others. Mr. Khrushchev said that he liked the Presidentʼs statement in his message to Congress to the effect that it was difficult to defend ideas not supporting better standards of living. However, the President drew the wrong conclusion. He believes that when people rise against tyrants, that is a result of Moscowʼs activities. This is not so. Failure by the US to understand this generates danger. The USSR does not foment revolution but the United States always looks for outside forces whenever certain upheavals occur. One example ofUSSRʼs determination not to interfere in internal affairs of other countries is Iran, an ally of the United States. The Soviet Union does not want a revolution there and does not do anything in that country to promote such a development. However, the people of the country are so poor that the country has become a volcano and changes are bound to occur sooner or later. The Shah will certainly be overthrown. By supporting the Shah, the United States generates adverse feelings toward the United States among the people of Iran and, conversely, favorable feelings toward the USSR. This, of course, is to the USʼs own disadvantage. The Soviet Union does not sympathize with dictators or tyranny. This is the crux of the matter. No agreement seems to be possible on this point, but this fact should be taken into account. Mr. Khrushchev reiterated that the Presidentʼs views were correct but that he drew the wrong conclusion. Another example of this situation is Cuba. A mere handful of people, headed by Fidel Castro, overthrew the Batista regime because of its oppressive nature. During Castroʼs fight against Batista, US capitalist circles, as they are called in the USSR, supported Batista and this is why the anger of the Cuban people turned against the United States. The Presidentʼs decision to launch a landing in Cuba only strengthened the revolutionary forces and Castroʼs own position, because the people of Cuba were afraid that they would get another Bastista and lose the achievements of the revolution. Castro is not a Communist but US policy can make him one. US policy is grist on the mill of Communists, because US actions prove that Communists are right. Mr. Khrushchev said that he himself had not been born a Communist and that it was capitalists who had made him a Communist. He continued by saying that the Presidentʼs concept was a dangerous one. The President had said that the US had attacked Cuba because it was a threat to American security. Can six million people really be a threat to the mighty US? The United States has stated that it is free to act, but what about Turkey and Iran? These two countries are US followers, they march in its wake, and they have US bases and rockets. If the US believes that it is free to act, then what should the US do? The US has set a precedent for intervention in internal affairs of other countries. TheUSSR is stronger than Turkey and Iran, just as the US is stronger than Cuba. This situation may cause miscalculation, to use the Presidentʼs term. Both sides should agree to rule out miscalculation. This is why, Mr. Khrushchev said, he was happy that the President had said that Cuba was a mistake.

The President said that he agreed with Mr. Khrushchev and expressed the belief that unless the present Prime Minister of Iran improved the lot of his people and ensured better living conditions, there would be important changes in that country. The second point he wanted to make, the President said, was that he held no brief for Batista. The disagreement between the United States and Castro is not over monopolies; this question could be subject to discussion. The main point is that Castro has announced his intention to act in that general area, using Cuba as a base. This could eventually create a peril to the United States. A further point is, the President said, that the United States recognizes that it has bases in Turkey and Iran. However, these two countries are so weak that they could be no threat to the USSR, no more than Cuba to the US. The President reminded Mr. Khrushchev of the announced policy of the USSR that it would not tolerate governments hostile to it in areas which it regards as being of national interest to it. He inquired what the USSRʼs reaction would be if a government associated with the West were established in Poland. The United States stands for the right of free choice for all peoples and if Castro had acted in that spirit, he might have obtained endorsement. The United States has never taken any action with regard to such countries as Guinea or Mali, because the governments in those countries were freely elected and their policies are regarded by the United States as the judgment of their leadership. The President concluded by saying that it was critical to have the changes occurring in the world and affecting the balance of power take place in a way that would not involve the prestige or the treaty commitments of our two countries. The changes should be peaceful. Finally, the President said, if certain governments should fail to produce better living for their people, if they failed to give better education, higher standard of living, etc., to their people, and if they worked in the interest of only a small group, their days would be doomed. But in all these developments, the President reiterated, we should avoid direct contact between our two countries so as not to prejudice the interests of their national security.

Mr. Khrushchev said he agreed with the Presidentʼs conclusion. Likewise, there were some points of agreement between him and the President with regard to Cuba, although there was still considerable disagreement. For instance, Mr. Khrushchev said, he agreed that the right of free choice should be ensured to all peoples but the question of choice should be solely up to the people themselves. If Castro has not held any elections, this is an internal affair and it grants no one the right to intervene. If Castro fails to give freedom to his people he will detach himself from them and he will be removed just as Batista was. It would be a different situation if our two countries took it upon themselves to decide this question. Mr. Khrushchev then said that he had noted some inconsistency in US policy. He specified that he did not mean the policy of the President personally, because he had been in the White House only since quite recently, but rather US policy in general. He said that the United States places great emphasis on democracy. However, if one takes Iran as an example, the ruler there is the Shah, who says that his power was given to him by God. Everybody knows how this power was seized by the Shahʼs father, who had been a Sergeant in the Iranian Army and who had usurped the throne by means of murder, plunder, and violence. Now the United States supports the Shah and the Iranian people transfer, as it were, their anger from the Shah to the United States. The United States is spending vast sums of money in Iran but that money does not go to the people; it is plundered by the Shahʼs entourage. The situation with regard to Franco5 is a similar one. The US knows how he came to power and yet it supports him. The United States supports the most reactionary regimes and this is how the people see US policy. This weakens US policy. The United States knows that Soviet policy is more popular than US policy in many areas where there is no Communism today. TheUSSR supports the aspirations of the people but it believes that the main thing is to be tolerant and not to interfere. People should be left to decide for themselves which form of government they desire. As to Fidel Castro, he was no Communist but then the US put pressure on him and applied sanctions against him, the USSR came to his assistance, in the form of trade and technical support. Under the influence of this aid he may turn Communist but, Mr. Khrushchev said, he as a Communist could not see which way Castro would go. Mr. Khrushchev then expressed the hope that the relations between the US and Cuba would improve in such fields as trade, etc. Such a statement, Mr. Khrushchev observed, might sound strange to the United States, but the USSR believes that such a development would improve relations not only in the Western Hemisphere, but also throughout the world. Mr. Khrushchev then referred to Turkey and said that in the recent change that had occurred in that country, the USSR had remained neutral because it regarded the change as an internal affair of that country. Likewise, there had been a second change in Korea within a relatively short time. Neither the USSR nor North Korea had interfered. One can say, however, that the present government will not last very long because it cannot give anything to the people. Of course, if South Korea did something in North Korea, the latter will act and the USSR will support it. However, the USSRʼs position is that of non-interference and of not creating new points of friction. It is a policy directed at bringing about a stable situation throughout the world. Mr. Khrushchev then addressed himself to the Laotian situation and said that the President knew very well that it had been the US Government which had overthrown Souvanna Phouma. One should be frank and recognize that both the United States and the USSR are supplying arms in Laos. The side supported by the USSR will be more successful because the arms supplied by the United States are directed against the people and the people do not want to take them. In China, the arms supplied by the United States to Chiang Kai-shek went to Mao Tse-tung. Chiang Kai-shek becamesort of a transfer point for American arms to MaoTse-tung. The reason for that was that Chiangʼs troops simply would not fight against the people. At that point Mao Tse-tung was weaker militarily than Chiang Kai-shek, but he won because his ideas won. In general, the history of revolutions is very instructive. During the Russian Revolutiqn, the revolutionaries were weak and a counter-revolution occurred. The revolutionaries had to fight against the counter-revolutionaries, the British, the Japanese, the French, and others. Even the United States intervened. Mr. Khrushchev recalled in this connection that he had read a book by an American Colonel entitled “U.S. Adventure in Siberia”.6 Notwithstanding all this, the revolution was victorious because the people were on its side. Mr. Khrushchev then said that we must be patient. If the United States supports old, moribund, reactjonary regimes, then a precedent of internal intervention will be set, which might cause a clash between our two countries. The USSR certainly does not desire such a development.

The President rejoined by saying that he wished to explain the logic of what Mr. Khrushchev considered to be the illogical point in US position. He said that he wanted to do this not in order to defend any of our actions, but simply to explain things as we saw them. The President stated that we regard the present balance of power between Sino-Soviet forces and the forces of the United States and Western Europe as being more or less in balance. The President said that he did not wish to discuss the details of the respective military postures, but that generally this was how we saw the situation.

Mr. Khrushchev interjected that he agreed with this.

The President then said that the United States has three interests. The first interest is that the right of free choice be ensured to all peoples and that such right be executed through elections as we understand them. He said that Mr. Khrushchev may not agree with this but this is what we desire. Such free choice is not possible today in many areas of the world. It is not possible in Cuba, it is not possible in Spain. Mr. Khrushchev had said that he could not understand how the US could object to Cuba while it was supporting Spain. The reason is that our second interest is of a strategic nature. Spain has no allies. It is a power standing alone. It is a dictatorship, but it makes no contribution to our strength.

Mr. Khrushchev interjected that the US had bases in Spain. The President replied that those bases were moving into history. Mr. Khrushchev observed that they were still there.

The President continued by saying that we also support Yugoslavia, which is not a capitalist country. Thus, the question might arise how the logic of our policy could be justified. The reason for this policy is that if Franco should be replaced and if the new regime were to associate itself with the Soviet Union, the balance of power in Western Europe would radically change and this is, of course, a matter of great concern to us. The third interest of the United States is to see that the next decade—and we cannot predict which way the developments during that time will go—should proceed in a way that would not greatly disturb the balance of power. The President said that he was concerned how this balance of power might be affected as China developed its military potential. This is our general view with which Mr. Khrushchev will not agree, but this is the logic of our position. Referring to the Laotian question, the President said that this was of particular concern to us. While relatively unimportant from the strategic standpoint, this country was included under the protocol to the SEATO agreement in the Treaty Area, and thus we have treaty commitments in that area. The President then said that speaking frankly, US policy in that region had not always been wise. He stated that he had not been able to make a final judgment as to what the peopleʼs desires in that area are. According to our information, there are about nine or ten thousand Pathet Lao but they have two distinct advantages in our view. One is that they are for change. The President remarked that he himself is for change and that he had been elected on the basis of his advocacy of change. He then said that was not to say that if a change were to occur in Laos it would be the one the people wanted. The second advantage Pathet Lao has is the fact that they received support not only in the form of supplies, but also in the form of Viet Minh manpower, which has made them a stronger force. The problem now from a historical standpoint is to find a solution not involving the prestige or the interests of our two countries. The President recalled that last March7 he had said that the United States wanted a neutral and independent Laos. The USSR had said it wanted the same. The question now is of definition of these two terms, “neutral” and “independent”. The President said that he believed that Cambodia and Burma were neutral and independent countries and inquired what Mr. Khrushchevʼs view on this was.

Mr. Khrushchev said that he held the same view.

The President continued by saying that the problem in Geneva was how to secure a cease-fire in Laos and to establish a mechanism for its verification. The point is that the Soviet side had stated that forces associated with us had taken action against Pathet Lao. For our part, we have information that forces supported by the Soviet Union have violated the cease-fire, particularly in the Padong area. Therefore, the ICC should undertake to determine the exact situation and if it were to find that the forces supported by the US are at fault, the US would take the responsibility. If we support the ICC in making such a determination, then the next step would be to create a neutral and independent Laos.

Mr. Khrushchev said that he wished to revert to the question of regimes which the USSR calls rotten and anti-popular. He said that he could cite a number of countries where power had been seized by military means. Ayub Khan, an ally of the United States, seized power by force in Pakistan by displacing the then Prime Minister of that country, and the United States immediately recognized him. A similar situation exists in other countries, particularly in Latin America. Such regimes are anti-popular and yet the United States supports them. However, if there is popular upheaval, the US regards this as Communist seizure of power and does not support it. This is dangerous for the future and leads to a deterioration of the situation. There should be no interference and people should decide for themselves. Tolerance and patience are absolutely required. Mr. Khrushchev then said that he wanted to say a few words about the so-called guerilla warfare against regimes that are not to US liking. There has been a lot of talk about this kind of warfare in the United States and this is a dangerous policy. Mr. Khrushchev asked the President to believe him that if guerilla units were to be sent from the outside and were not supported by the people, that would be a hopeless undertaking. He said that the USSR had had great experience in this kind of warfare throughout its own history. The war against Napoleon in 1812, the Civil War, including the struggle against the US in Siberia, and World War II, had been fought with guerilla units. If guerilla troops are local troops, belonging to the country, then every bush is their ally. If they are not, then only bloodshed will occur and such an undertaking will pay no dividends. Mr. Khrushchev then recalled his service in the Red Army and said that the Red Army had British clothing seized from the White Army under Denikin, which was supported by the British and whose units were destroyed by the Reds. In spite of its being very poor, the Red Army won because the people were on its side. Mr. Khrushchev then observed that our two sides differed as to their understanding of what popular or anti-popular movements were. However, both sides should agree not to interfere and let the peoples decide for themselves. This is the only wise course to take. Modern times are not like the past; modern weapons are terrible. He said that he did not know whether the balance of power was exact, but that did not matter anyway. Both sides know very well that they have enough power to destroy each other. This is why there should be no interference. Mr. Khrushchev then referred to Angola and said that the United States supported Portugal in this matter because it was its ally. The USSR regards this situation as a popular war against colonialists. The US has no colonies but it supports colonial countries, and this is why the people are against it. There was a time when the United States was a leader in the fight for freedom. As a matter of fact, the Russian Czar refused to recognize the United States for twenty-six years because he regarded the United States as an illegitimate creature. Now the United States refuses to recognize New China—things have changed, havenʼt they?

The President said that he wanted first to refer to Angola and said that he agreed with what Mr. Khrushchev had said. In fact, the US and USSR had voted alike in the U.N. General Assembly and Portugal was bitter because of this. We have supported the liberation movement in Africa, and if one should take a look at the map of Africa today, he would see a great number of new countries. We hope that in the next two or three years the number will increase still further.

Mr. Khrushchev inquired with regard to Algeria and the Congo.

The President said that the United States had supported U.N. actions directed against Belgian interests in the Congo, particularly in the Katanga area, where the Belgians relied on Tshombe.8 The United States supported U.N. actions which sharply curtailed Belgian influence in that area. Belgium was of course disturbed by this.

Mr. Khrushchev said that this was true but the US voice in these matters was very timid. The Belgians may be displeased but the people are even more displeased. US policy is very uneven and even when the United States supports anti-colonialism for tactical reasons, its voice is very quiet. Basically, US policy is that of support for colonialist powers.

The President stated that in NATO the US is allied to a number of countries which are colonial powers. Yet in view of the great changes that have occurred in Africa, where some 25 countries have obtained their independence in a very short time, it is quite clear what the trend is.

Mr. Khrushchev said that this was true but wondered what the reason for this trend was and whose effort had brought about the change. He said that if the two countries could unite their efforts they could do away with the vestiges of colonialism. The liberated peoples should be left alone to take any path they want. Naturally, theUSSR would be pleased if they took the Socialist path.

The President then stated that what was of concern to the United States was the speech Mr. Khrushchev had made last January and in which he had advanced the thesis of three types of war. The problem is how this thesis should be interpreted, particularly the point on the so-called national wars of liberation. The fact is that certain groups seize power, frequently by military means. Some of such groups are friendly to the USSR and some to the United States, and the two countries lend support to them. If one takes the situation in Viet Nam, there are some seven to fifteen thousand guerillas there. We do not believe that they reflect the will of the people, while the USSR may believe so. The problem is to avoid getting involved in direct contact as we support the respective groups. In Laos, where the two countries are openly supporting the respective local groupings, the question is how to draw fire out of the situation in a way that would be mutually satisfactory to both sides.

Mr. Khrushchev said that the President and himself had a different understanding of liberation wars. As far as Laos is concerned, the Soviet Union is for an independent and neutral Laos and the Foreign Ministers of the two countries are probably talking about this problem right now. Referring to his January speech,9 in which he had mentioned three types of war, Mr. Khrushchev said that the U.N. had passed a resolution advocating independence for all colonial peoples. Portugal has been flouting that resolution and the question arises as to how long the people should wait. In these circumstances, the peopleʼs only recourse is to rise in arms. The Soviet Union believes that this is a sacred war. A similar situation prevails in Algeria. De Gaulle, who is an ally of the United States, is an intelligent man and perhaps he would be doing more if he had no problem with his generals. Of course, this is an internal matter of France, but what should the Algerian people do—wait for France? The fact is that Algeria should belong to Algerians and Algerians are Arabs. The only thing they can do is rise. Such a war is sacred and the Soviet Union supports it. Such wars will go on. The United States itself rose against the British. The Soviet Union has been proud of the United States in this respect. But now the US has changed its position and it is against other peoples following its suit. The Soviet Union is against all wars, both general and local. In this respect it is ahead of the United States, because the United States recognizes local wars. However, the Soviet Union recognizes the freedom of struggle for liberty. Although the Soviet Union does not participate directly, it sympathizes with and supports such wars. Mr. Khrushchev then said that he wanted to say a few words about China. At the same time, he wanted to emphasize that he had not been authorized or requested to speak on Chinaʼs behalf. He said he simply wanted to set forth his thinking on the problem. He said that US relations with China were very aggravated. Obviously they could not be improved until the United States ended the occupation of Taiwan. The most realistic policy would be that of recognizing China and having China admitted as a member of the United Nations. What kind of United Nations is it when it does not have among its members a nation numbering 600 million people? On the other hand, it should be clear that China would never join the United Nations if Chiang Kai-shek were to be still there. This would be a discrimination against Chinaʼs rights. There is no question that at some point China will gather its strength and liberate Taiwan. If the Soviet Union were in Chinaʼs place, it would probably have attacked Taiwan long time ago. The Soviet Union supports the policy of reunification of Chinaʼs territory. As a matter of fact, the United States itself signed a document recognizing Taiwan as part of China. Mr. Khrushchev said that he did not know whether the United States was ready for a change in its policy toward China. The relations between Chiang Kai-shek and Mao Tse-tung are an internal affair of China, and neither the US nor theUSSR should interfere. This would be a reasonable course and it would promote a peaceful development of the situation. Mr. Khrushchev said that he was glad that there were voices in the United States asking for a change in US policy toward China, but said that he did not know how that policy would develop. He reiterated that he had not been requested by the Chinese to speak on their behalf.

The President said that he wanted to make two points. First, with regard to the problem of national independence in Africa, he believed that Africa had made an extraordinary step in that direction and the United States had associated itself with that movement on many occasions. Perhaps more could have been done, but we do have problems with our allies. The President recalled that in 1956 he had spoken in the Senate about the need for national self-determination in Algeria. This movement of self-determination is now going on in Asia and Africa. What concerns us is what will come after these changes. It is here that disagreement exists between our two countries. The President recalled his remark about the balance of power being more or less even today and stated that we were concerned that this balance might be disturbed if some of these countries should associate themselves with the USSR. A glance at the map of the divided world is a sufficient illustration of this point. The second point regards China. The President said that even before he had assumed office China had made strong attacks against the United States and himself personally, and this has been going on like a drumbeat ever since. At the same time the USSR was cordial and expressed the hope that our relations would improve. The President said that he recognized that China was a forceful nation, that its population was one quarter of the world, and that it might still further increase its strength. He also recognized that bad relations between the United States and China affected world relations in general. However, if the United States were to withdraw from Taiwan, it would have a strategic problem. It would be confined to its shores and its strategic position in Asia would be greatly impaired. This is a problem of security for the United States.

Mr. Khrushchev said that this was an interesting conception with which he could not agree. Now he could understand the Presidentʼs conception of neutrality. Apparently the US recognizes neutrality only if countries are its followers. If not, no such recognition is given. The Soviet position is just the opposite. The Soviet Union sympathizes with countries which have embarked upon the Socialist path but it also gives full recognition to capitalist countries and here is the difference. It is true that if some country, e.g., in Africa, were to adopt the Socialist system, that might mean that a few drops would be added to the bucket of Communist power if this balance of power were regarded as consisting of a bucket on each side. But this would be an expression of popular will. If there were to be interference, there would be a chain reaction and ultimately war between our two countries. Mr. Khrushchev then recalled the recent visit to the Soviet Union by the Prime Minister of Somalia. The Prime Minister is a comparatively young man who was educated in the spirit of Italian culture. He said that he wanted his country to develop along Socialist lines. But the question arises as to what is Socialism in the view of all those people. Nasser, Nehru, Nkrumah, Sukarno10 —all of them have said that they want their countries to develop along Socialist lines; but what kind of a Socialist is Nasser when he keeps Communists in jail? Nehru certainly does not favor the Communist party of India either. However, the Soviet Union helps these people and this is a manifestation of its policy of non-interference. If a country embarks on the road of capitalism the Soviet Union is convinced, and sincerely desires, that it will return to the path of Socialism. But it will be the people who will bring about such change. This is why the Presidentʼs argument regarding Taiwan sounds strange.

The President interjected that the situation should be viewed in the light of Chinese hostility. Mr. Khrushchev replied that the Chinese cannot reconcile themselves with US bases on Taiwan.

Mr. Khrushchev continued by saying that this policy is unreasonable and might ultimately cause war. He then stated that the United States had surrounded the USSR with bases. This is very unwise and aggravates the relations between the two countries. The countries where the bases are located spend money on their military establishments while their people live like paupers. Thus these people have the choice of developing along militarist lines or rising. We must be reasonable and keep our forces within our national boundaries. This is Soviet policy. The President himself has recognized this fact because in his speeches he has stated the need for reviewing the deployment of US bases, in part because of technological developments and also for other reasons. So the people in the countries where the United States has bases will rise and the US will blame the USSR for that, but it will be its own fault. Thus, Mr. Khrushchev continued, the Presidentʼs argument only fortifies the views of the Chinese. The US will not leave Taiwan and force will have to be used. This is a sad thing indeed. Referring to Chinese statements, Mr. Khrushchev said that the Chinese were against US policy, but then the Soviet Union has also criticized US policy. Mr. Khrushchev said that he had not spoken against the President personally and would not wish to do so. He said he wanted to improve relations between the two countries with the President in the White House, but he may turn out to be wrong. In that event he would have to criticize the President too. The best thing for the United States would be to recognize China because diplomatic relations alone impose certain obligations. The United States could continue to support Chiang Kai-shek, but of course only morally. The Chinese position is correct and the United States should settle its differences with China. The USSR certainly hopes that this will take place. Mr. Khrushchev reiterated that if the USSR had been in Chinaʼs shoes, it would have acted long time ago. He again referred to the fight against Americans in the Far East and against the French, the British, and Germans in other areas of Russia during the Civil War. He said that this fight had been carried on until its victorious end and that any country would do the same. Such wars are not aggressive, they are holy wars.

The President said that he wanted to reply to Mr. Khrushchevʼs remark regarding the USʼs conception of neutrality. He said he believed that our two countries with their different social systems or any other country could pursue an independent policy. Yugoslavia, India, and Burma are extremely satisfactory situations as far as the United States is concerned. The problem is if the Communist cause were to win in certain areas and if those areas were to associate themselves closely with the Soviet Union, that would create strategic problems for the United States. The same would apply to the Soviet Union if in a country like Poland a government were created that associated itself closely with the West. Referring to Mr. Khrushchevʼs remark that the United States supports certain governments which are not supported by the people, the President said that this may be so. However, the President said, if the people of Poland were given a chance to express their choice, one could not be certain as to what the result would be. Certainly one could think that they might not necessarily support the present government. The President then said that certain problems cannot be successfully settled, at least here. However, he expressed the hope that the Laotian problem could be discussed in more detail as well as the problem of nuclear tests, which is of interest to our two countries and to the world in general. Agreement on this issue would certainly improve the climate throughout the world.

Mr. Khrushchev said that he wanted to reply on the question of Poland. He said it was not respectful on the Presidentʼs part to speak in such a manner of a government the US recognizes and with which it maintains diplomatic relations. After all, Poland could say similar things about the United States. This, he said, is the line of aggravating rather than improving relations. He suggested that the situation be tested, perhaps by having a public debate any place in the USSR or the United States, and then the people will say where the truth lies. Poland has had elections to its parliament, the Sejm, and its election system is more democratic than that in the United States.

The President interjected that people in the United States had a choice, whereas in Poland there was only one group. Mr. Khrushchev replied that parties in the United States were only for the purpose of deluding the people, since there was no difference between the parties. This, he said, was the opinion of the Soviet Union, which, of course, did not commit either the Soviet Union or the United States to anything. In any event, no one should interfere in the Soviet Unionʼs internal affairs. Mr. Khrushchev continued by saying that another test of the situation would be to withdraw the forces of the two sides and have the people decide. The Soviet Union has very few forces in Poland and has already withdrawn its troops from Hungary. If forces were withdrawn, there would not be even a semblance of pressure on the people in those areas. Referring to Taiwan, Mr. Khrushchev recalled the Presidentʼs remark that withdrawal of US troops from that area would affect US strategic posture. This, he said, might be true, but what about the Chinese position—how should they regard the occupation of Taiwan? If the United States proceeds from such an assumption, Mr. Khrushchev said, he will be forced to doubt whether the United States really wants peaceful co- existence or is simply seeking a pretext for warlike developments. The Soviet Union sympathizes with the Chinese and this seems to be the only solution. There is no other way out. After all, the United States might even occupy Crimea and say that this would improve its strategic position. This would be true. But it would be the policy of Dulles, a policy of strength. Times have changed and such policy is doomed to failure. If the US wants to dictate its conditions, that is inconceivable today. No improvement of relations would be possible in such circumstances. Reverting to Laos, Mr. Khrushchev said that the Conference was in session and that it was there that a solution should be worked out. The USSR will exert efforts to solve the Laotian question and have a government establish control in that country. However, the Soviet Union will not agree to the ICCʼs becoming a kind of supragovernment administering the country.

The President said that he wanted to respond to these remarks without referring to Poland or Taiwan. He said he agreed that the ICC should be no government. However, it should determine whether a cease-fire exists. The Soviet side has claimed that there have been breaches on the part of the forces supported by us. Our people have said that the forces supported by the Soviet Union have breached the cease-fire. The President said he believed it would be a simple matter for the ICC to examine these charges and to submit its report. This should take only a few days and then the next step would be the creation of an independent and neutral Laos.

Mr. Khrushchev responded by saying that the Soviet Union approached the situation differently. Referring to the Presidentʼs remark that Viet Minh forces were involved in Laos, he said that he had no such information and that this was inaccurate. What is more accurate, and what is an actual fact, is that military action was started from Thailand by the United States.

The President replied that whether he or Mr. Khrushchev were right the problem was to have the ICC examine the situation with regard to the cease-fire, without action by Viet Minh or any other action. The cease-fire is the main problem now.

Mr. Khrushchev said that he agreed. However, he said that this could not be done without taking into account the forces participating in the struggle. There are three forces in this area and they must agree among themselves. Even if our two countries were to agree, that agreement would serve no useful purpose without agreement among the forces participating in the struggle.

The President suggested that the two countries use their influence with the people they are associated with to induce them to support the ICC and grant the Commission free access to the respective areas, so that the Commission could perform its task effectively. Then the next step would be the creation of an independent and neutral Laos.

Mr. Khrushchev expressed agreement that both countries should use their influence so as to bring about agreement among the forces participating in the Laotian struggle.

The President said that he believed that on this point agreement could be reached here. He remarked facetiously that this should be possible even if no agreement could be reached on the merits of the American election system.

Mr. Khrushchev said that this latter question was an internal affair of the United States.

In view of the late hour, the President suggested that perhaps, if there was a chance, the question of nuclear tests could be discussed during the dinner given by the Austrian President, so that tomorrow most of the time could be devoted to the problem of Germany. Otherwise, both problems could be discussed tomorrow.

Mr. Khrushchev replied that he would like to connect the questions of nuclear tests and disarmament. He said that he would set forth his position on this issue as well as, of course, on Germany. The main problem in this latter matter is that of a peace treaty. The Soviet Union hopes that the US will understand this question so that both countries can sign a peace treaty together. This would improve relations. But if the United States refuses to sign a peace treaty, the Soviet Union will do so and nothing will stop it.

The conversation ended at 6:45 P.M.



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, Presidentʼs Office Files, USSR. Secret. Drafted by Akalovsky. According to another copy, this memorandum of conversation was approved by the White House on June 23. (Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110) A summary of the conversation was transmitted in Secto 16 from Vienna, June 4. (Ibid., Central Files, 600.001/6-461) The meeting was held at the Ambassadorʼs residence.

1 A memorandum of the luncheon conversation is printed as Document 84.

2 For a record of the interview with Senator Humphrey in December 1958, see Foreign Relations, 1958-1960, vol. VIII, pp. 148-152. Regarding the interview with Walter Lippmann, see footnote 3, Document 69.

3 See Document 83.

5 General Francisco Franco y Bahamonde, Spanish Chief of State.

6 William S. Graves, Americaʼs Siberian Adventure, 1918-1920, New York, 1931.

7 Reference is to the meeting between the President and Gromyko, March 27; see Document 50.

8 Moise Tshombe, President of the Katanga Government.

9 See Document 15.

10 Kwame Nkrumah, President of the Republic of Ghana, and Akmed Sukarno, President of the Republic of Indonesia.





86. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Vienna, June 3, 1961.

US/MC/3

SUBJECT

Disarmament



PARTICIPANTS

United States Secretary Rusk

Amb. Thompson (part-time)

Mr. Bohlen (part-time)

Mr. Kohler (part-time)

Mr. Nitze (part-time)

Mr. Armitage (part-time)

Amb. Matthews (part-time)





USSR Foreign Minister Gromyko

Ambassador Menshikov

Mr. Dobrynin





In conversations at the Ambassadorʼs Residence in Vienna following the Presidentʼs luncheon for Khrushchev the Secretary and Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko turned to a discussion on disarmament. The Secretary referred to the so-called bilateral disarmament talks at Washington beginning June 19 to be continued a few weeks later in Moscow. He thought that perhaps an agreement could be reached on proposals regarding particularly the forum for broader disarmament discussions.

Gromyko said that he had made to Ambassador Stevenson a number of reasonable proposals as to composition and the Secretary pointed out that Ambassador Stevenson had made some reasonable proposals on our side as well.

Gromyko referred to the fact that the US was always talking about control [verification]. He said that Mr. Khrushchev had spoken at length of Soviet willingness to accept control of disarmament in the UN General Assembly session last fall. Not a single other delegation had made any mention of this proposal. The Secretary said that this question could be discussed endlessly on a purely theoretical basis. Mr. Gromyko knew as well as he that nobody would disarm during the next few years. He said that perhaps if everybody were really disarmed then the question of controls would be a simple matter. In this connection he wanted to say frankly that the US was very taken aback by the Soviet position in the resumed nuclear test negotiations in Geneva. Without replying directly to the Secretary, Mr. Gromyko entered into a history of disarmament discussions and negotiations over the past 15 or 16 years. He said that there had been endless discussions of partial measures of disarmament and they had led to absolutely no results. All Soviet proposals for measures in this field had been rejected on the grounds that they would change the balance of power in favor of the Soviet Union. It was now time to tackle general and complete disarmament instead of starting up a new round of discussions of partial measures which could go on for another 10 years.

The Secretary then said that in view of the many years that had passed he wanted to ask Mr. Gromyko frankly why the Soviet Union had rejected the Baruch proposals.1 After some personal references to Mr. Baruch, Gromyko said that those proposals were calculated to ensure a continued US monopoly of atomic weapons. The Secretary said he thought this had been one of a number of other mistakes and that the Soviets could have easily accomplished the almost complete disarmament of the United States, instead of prodding us into rearming. Gromyko asked what they should have done and the Secretary replied that they should have left Greece alone, left Berlin alone, and left Korea alone. He then went on to say that when the rest of the world did not know what was going on in the Soviet Union this was a deterrent to disarmament. In fact, he said, the Soviet Union could not maintain its policies of military secrecy and also achieve disarmament. These two policies—and he was willing to grant that the Soviet Union really wanted disarmament—were incompatible. There was some discussion of post-war developments in this field including a reference to Rooseveltʼs statement at Yalta that American troops would be maintained in Europe only a couple of years after the war. At the end of this discussion the Secretary said he saw only two roads to disarmament. The first would be by the prior settlement of political problems which might create possibilities for a broader disarmament agreement. The second would be disarmament on a step by step basis with full verification and control at each step. Gromyko interjected that one of the United Statesʼ principal allies, Chancellor Adenauer, had repeatedly said and even said in a letter to Chairman Khrushchev that no solution of political problems was possible unless there was first progress on disarmament. The Secretary resumed saying that he had followed disarmament questions carefully since 1925. For nearly 30 years one disarmament conference after another had taken place. They seemed to him ceremonial like the mating dance of the goonie birds in the Pacific Islands. He felt it was time to be realistic about this problem. The immediate action was the conference in Geneva. He repeated that we were skeptical about the regression in the Soviet position there. In the broad field of disarmament this was a simple matter but it was a vital test. If the Soviets were serious about disarmament they would really try to come to an acceptable agreement in Geneva.

Mr. Gromyko then referred to the US adoption of the Russian word “troika” to describe the new Soviet proposals.2 The Secretary interjected that the troika had appeared in twelve different places now. Mr. Gromyko resumed, saying troika was a good word and a good idea. The Soviets felt that this proposal was no more than adequate to protect the Soviet Unionʼs natural rights. They were only asking for one-third, not two-thirds. They had a right to one-third. Any decisions adopted under the troika proposals against Soviet interests—or indeed against US interests—would be excluded. He said flatly that they were not going to deviate from this proposal. He did not want to use the word “demand” which was too strong but the Soviets were very firm on this. There was a question of the test ban negotiations, and the UN or any other international organization. If the troika proposals were adopted the US would be even better off than the USSR because the other one-third would side more often with the US than with the USSR. The Secretary commented that the real question was whether or not one-third should have a veto. Gromyko replied that if there were no veto the Soviet proposal would not make sense. The Secretary said that if adequate investigations of seismic events were not agreed on, a nuclear test ban would become improbable. Gromyko replied—after some uncertainty as to whether he had said two or three—that three investigations would be acceptable, subject of course to the agreed seismic indicators; against this the US was proposing 20 investigations (Mr. Nitze interjected 20 or 30 indicating he was matching Mr. Gromykoʼs reference to “2 or 3”).

The Secretary said that the Soviet troika proposals were a real block to any progress in the disarmament field. If they were maintained, it would be a waste of time even to discuss disarmament since no disarmament would be possible if any one country could block any real inspection. Gromyko then cited as a precedent, President Rooseveltʼs proposal of a veto in the UN Security Council. The Secretary confirmed that the US continued to accept a veto of the kind contained in the UN Charter. However, he pointed out that this was really limited in its original concept to considerations involving the use of force and the possibility of war. Gromyko replied that if the whole world were capitalist perhaps the question of the veto would not arise. However, the Socialist bloc does exist. The Secretary said that even if there were a disarmament agreement the first Soviet veto would bring it to an end since this would be an automatic signal to all the other parties to start to rearm.

Gromyko then said that in the present circumstances general and complete disarmament was the only way out. The Secretary asked him if he were sure that general and complete disarmament was a real policy of the USSR which they were ready to put into practical effect. He asked further what the Soviets would do, for example, with the Poles, the Czechs, or Hungarians if they had no arms. (At this point there were some side talks between Gromyko and Menshikov during which the latter said the Secretaryʼs statement implied Soviet domination of Eastern European countries.) Gromyko replied that what happened in Poland, Czechoslovakia, and so forth, was a question that they would decide for themselves. Of course there were treaty commitments between some of these countries just as there were between the US and their allies. The Secretary said that he had just been wondering about this question. Certainly, he observed, an early result of disarmament would be the self-determination of peoples. Gromyko replied that the Soviets were always ready for self-determination. However, he believed he saw in the Secretaryʼs remarks the roots of a wrong approach. The Secretaryʼs idea would not help. He then said (rather as an after-thought) that it was possible that the Americans had some doubt about the behavior of its present allies after general and complete disarmament.

The Secretary then asked when the USSR had adopted the troika idea. Was it only two years ago? Gromyko replied that everybody gets wiser in time or should get wiser. He said that the Sovietsʼ experience with theUN operation in the Congo had made them realize the importance of this proposal. He then went on at some length as to the long years of US domination of the United Nations by a mechanical voting majority. Referring to the fact that the composition of the UN had changed, the Secretary said he would have understood the troika proposal better if it had been made in the late 1940ʼs. Gromyko replied that the Soviets had not made it at that time because they thought the United States would behave better in the UN and operate on a basis of reconciling the views of the wartime allies on all major problems. President Rooseveltʼs veto proposals for the UN Charter represented a very realistic approach. However, the United States since that time has invalidated many provisions of the Charter and emasculated the Security Council.

Gromyko said the UN arrangements had been worked out by compromise so that there would be no direct collision of interests. It was the deviations from UN principles that had caused trouble. The Secretary suggested that it might be helpful to hear the views of each side concerning the course of events since the adoption of the Charter.

Mr. Gromyko said the Charter was good, though some provisions were vague. The Soviets did not wish to place themselves in a position where on all matters substantively affecting their interests they were outvoted. Nor would they want to put the US in that position. The US would also be better off under a troika arrangement.

The Secretary said this arrangement would run against every principle of arbitration and conciliation. Gromyko said they did not want arbitration. Nothing said about the Security Council or in the General Assembly halls would convince them that any arrangement would produce impartial voting. Always, even in the International Court of Justice, voting reflected the state of affairs in the world. Arbitration and conciliation, therefore, were not solutions to the problem and would not help.

The Secretary expressed regrets that the preceding Administration had not gotten a test ban agreement before the Soviets invented the troika. Gromyko said the US should have accepted before the Soviets became wiser.

The Secretary said he was pessimistic regarding the troika and doubted whether the other two-thirds, as the Soviets term them, would see a solution in it. Gromyko said that the two-thirds was the formal side of the question. The substantive side was that any international body would not take decisions that related to the security interests of all countries without unanimity. There were two sides to the troika proposal: the three-sided arrangement plus unanimity of the most powerful countries. The US wants an order by which it could impose its decisions on the Soviet Union. Gromyko asked how he could convince the US that this was not possible.

Mr. Nitze reminded Gromyko that disarmament was a question which affected the vital interests of our countries, and we are thus dealing with the question of whether and how an agreement can be made effective and how its implementation can be insured at each stage.

Gromyko said that one could adopt a paper agreement but not contribute to a solution. You must seek agreement with the USSR; this is the way of solution. We do not want to take decisions against you. You must reconcile your interests with ours. Under President Roosevelt one proceeded from this assumption. If the two powers were not able to reconcile their interests, it was better not to have a decision.

Ambassador Thompson suggested that there was a vast difference between important political decisions where it might possibly be granted that no great power could let others tell them what to do. Applying this to disarmament was somewhat like the following analogy: Two men have revolvers and decide to give them up. They must be able to check whether another revolver is not hidden under the vest of the second party.

Gromyko said the Soviets are aiming at this purpose. General and complete disarmament—if a treaty was concluded, then all pockets could be examined. Even trousers could be taken off.

Mr. Nitze asked how you get through the intermediate stages. Gromyko said they did not propose GCD like a rocket shot. They had done their best to set out the stages with controls. Until complete disarmament was reached, there naturally would not be complete control. The degree of control would be in accordance with the degree of disarmament. Control would be in accordance with the steps being taken.

Mr. Nitze said the test ban could be viewed as a first step in which we could see how controls would work out. Ambassador Matthews said he concluded Gromyko was pessimistic regarding disarmament. Gromyko replied he was pessimistic regarding the US position on disarmament. There was a question of the horse and the cart, and the Soviets proposed that the two go together.

The Secretary said he wished to understand how the troika administration would actually work. Suppose we have an agreement regarding the number of inspection posts and the number of on-site inspections. The machines record a seismic event, say in Reno, of a magnitude above the 4.75 threshold. If the inspection teams say that they should go to Reno and this inspection would be within the agreed number, is it the Soviet view that the US Administrator on the troika could say “No, you cannot go to Reno?” Gromyko said that if the inspection was in the quota of say three per year, it would be carried out according to the provisions on which understanding had been reached. It would be up to the scientists to agree. There would be a question regarding other inspections.

The Secretary said for the moment we were talking about the number of agreed inspections. If the scientists have to agree unanimously, then we get the same problem all over at a different level. However, if there was an acknowledged seismic event above the 4.75 threshold, on what question do the Soviets consider it necessary for the country being inspected to have reservations? We would already have agreed to the necessity for the inspections. Gromyko replied that the functions of the administrative body were not precisely determined. As far as the agreement on the quota of inspections, if the scientific instruments agreed on the need for inspection, then it must be examined.

Mr. Nitze said suppose the US scientists think the event not up to the 4.75 threshold, the Soviets and other (perhaps British) scientists say the event was above the threshold. Can the US Administrator veto inspection teams going to Reno? Gromyko said the administrators should agree; it canʼt be done automatically. The Secretary wondered whether this was not a formal requirement. We both assume that we would not be testing if the agreement were signed. canʼt we be reasonably relaxed regarding inspection? We would not expect anything to be found in Reno, and the Soviets would probably not expect anything to be found in Kiev. Why prevent inspections? Gromyko said if there were disagreement among the scientists, then the administrative body should decide according to the administrative rules, that is, the troika. Why build in advance such an abundance of doubts? He asked the Secretary directly, do you think we are exploding atomic weapons now? The Secretary replied that we have no evidence that the Soviets are testing, but that it is very difficult to prove a negative proposition. Gromyko stated vigorously that the Soviets think that the US is sure the Soviets are not testing.

The Secretary said underground testing is more a problem than atmospheric testing. We could probably work out an atmospheric agreement without much difficulty. Gromyko said the best solution would be to prohibit all kinds of testing. The Secretary said we would like to work toward it; 4.75 seems to be the practical limit right now. If scientists can reduce this to zero, so much the better. You and we understand that these things go to the heart of our national concerns. It is somewhat easier for the Soviets since they can go all around the US on busses and check up. He remarked in jest that the Soviets have fewer busses. We did not in any case have to have US inspectors, and inspectors of other nationalities, say Swiss, would be checking solely on the presence or absence of an explosion.

Gromyko said without an agreement it is possible to detect all testing. An agreement would make everybody more confident. Why should the US in advance suspect violations? The Soviets considered such stress on voting and the veto an undue concern.

Mr. Nitze said one must assume these matters affect the vital interests of our countries, and both countries had an acknowledged interest in having inspections. Then we could invite Soviet inspectors and they invite ours, and both would be serving their national interests.

The Secretary said underground testing was not now detectable. The US wanted to be sure the Soviets stop if we stop testing. He made the next aversion just in case it presented a problem for the Soviets. Were there, he asked, particular areas which the Soviets would not want to have examined? If so, we could probably work out some way to handle this problem. He hoped this was not an obstacle to Soviet agreement, but he gathered that this was a far-reaching political issue for them.

Gromyko said the Soviets would resume testing if the US did, and other countries would also. He emphasized that the Soviets would not lose more than we by resumption. Everybody would lose, but he replied the Soviets were not more interested in a testing agreement than was the US. The Secretary and Gromyko agreed that each otherʼs scientists would be asking for more money in case of resumption.

Ambassador Thompson said that with regard to the question of suspensions, it was a factor for the US that we had to take the agreement to the Senate, and to successfully defend it, it would have to be an agreement without loopholes. The Secretary said this was the problem expressed in the second degree, the first degree was what we can recommend ourselves to Congress. He did not want to review history, but since 1945 we think there has been a long stretch of agreements that have not been observed. Our problem of mutual trust is not a new one. Neither of us can put its basic interests in the otherʼs hands. We need assurances, and we think that an effective inspection system could contribute to mutual trust.

Gromyko asked where was that other Hammarskjold that could be objective? The Secretary said that here we were talking about a more limited question, regarding the troika applied to inspection administration. Gromyko said the situation was “most complicated.” The Secretary said Gromyko understood our political system and would understand that a signature of a treaty would absorb the energies of the Administration in getting passage of the agreement. Gromyko replied that especially regarding foreign affairs matters the Administration could convince Senators.

The Secretary said that we regretted the prospect that this issue might turn up as a major problem in the field of general disarmament, even should we all agree to go far down the road toward disarmament. Gromyko said we should proceed on disarmament even without a testing agreement. Disarmament discussions should not be conditional on this question of testing, although the situation would be quite different if a testing agreement were signed.

Mr. Nitze asked how one could be optimistic concerning the outlook for broader disarmament if we could not solve the easier problems? Gromyko agreed that we should solve the testing agreement, but if we could not, it was the Soviet position that general disarmament discussions should go forward. Mr. Nitze asked whether the troika proposal would not cut across other disarmament proposals. Gromyko said that they had formulated proposals for our examination. He again stressed that if tests were resumed, the Soviets would not lose more than the US. Everybody would lose, but he repeated that the Soviets would not lose more.

Later in the conversation, Gromyko said the time might come when the US would regret it did not accept the troika. The Secretary expressed his doubt, but said he had become reluctant to become categorical as he had gotten older.

The Secretary said that he took it that we were on dead center regarding nuclear testing. Gromyko nodded and said that “It is a very complicated situation.” The Secretary said that we had gone quite a way to meet the Soviet points of view and up popped the troika. Gromyko said they wanted to correct their mistakes. Maybe they should have raised the troika before. He said it would not damage the US but would protect their own interests. They could not have agreements that permitted arbitrary decisions, and he thought that the US had too great suspicions of the Soviet Union.

The Secretary said our distrust did not begin to match Soviet distrust for an impartial administration. Gromyko retorted that there was no such being. Was Hammarskjold one? He had been pushed by the US and Western powers to demonstrate his lack of impartiality. The Soviets think the two powers should try to reach agreement together. It was more important for the US to agree with the Soviet Union than with Hammarskjold. Now the US has an agreement with Hammarskjold but not with the Soviet Union.

Ambassador Thompson expressed the opinion that the Soviets had made a real misjudgment regarding Hammarskjold. They think Hammarskjold made judgments for the sake of the US, when he actually made them for what he believed to be the purposes of the UN. This did not really affect the proposition that no great power would allow the imposition of a decision affecting its vital interests.

Gromyko said the Security Council took good decisions on the Congo. It would have been better if they had been carried out. Lumumba would not have been killed, he was not a Communist. Who did not let the decisions be carried out? Without the backing of the Western powers Hammarskjold could not have acted as he did. The US may consider that some matters can be solved without the understanding of the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union does not think so. Perhaps some problems could be postponed. Such a situation is not normal. One cannot rely only on a majority. This might change to the US disadvantage. The troika is not so bad as the US considers.3



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 397.5611-GE/6-361. Secret. Drafted by Armitage and Kohler and approved in S on June 18. A summary of this conversation, transmitted in Secto 15 from Vienna, June 4, is in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. VII, pp. 83-85.

1 For text of this proposal, June 14, 1946, see A Decade of American Foreign Policy: Basic Documents, 1941-1949, pp. 865-871.

2 For text of the Soviet troika proposal, April 28, see Documents on Disarmament, 1961, pp. 134-142. Extracts are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 1129-1130.

3 During a lull in the discussion of disarmament, Rusk told Gromyko that the United States intended to approach Outer Mongolia regarding the possibility of exchanging diplomatic missions. A 1-page memorandum of this part of the conversation, US/MC/12, is in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 1901.





87. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Vienna, June 4, 1961, 10:15 a.m.

SUBJECT

Meeting Between The President and Chairman Khrushchev in Vienna



PARTICIPANTS

US The President

The Secretary

Ambassador Bohlen

Ambassador Thompson

EUR—Mr. Kohler

D—Mr. Akalosvky (interpreting)





USSR Chairman Khrushchev

Foreign Minister Gromyko

Mr. Dobrynin, Chief, American Countries Division, USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Ambassador Menshikov

Mr. Sukhodrev, Interpreter,USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs





During the exchange of amenities, the President asked Mr. Khrushchev what part of the USSR he was from. Mr. Khrushchev replied that he had been born in Russia, in a village in the vicinity of Kursk, 7 to 10 kilometers from the Ukrainian border, but that he had spent the early part of his life in the Ukraine. In this connection, he mentioned that recently very large deposits of iron ore had been found near Kursk. The deposits already prospected are estimated at 30 billion tons. The general estimate of these particular deposits is about 300 billion tons. Mr. Khrushchev said that according to US official statistics total deposits of iron ore in the US are estimated at 5 billion tons. Thus, he said, Soviet deposits will be sufficient to cover the needs of the entire world for a long time to come.

The President observed that he wondered why then the Soviet Union was interested in Laos.

Mr. Khrushchev said that the Soviet Union was not interested in Laos, but that it was the US which had created the Laotian situation.

The President said that he was not sure whether Mr. Khrushchev and himself could reach agreement on all the items under discussion, but he appreciated the frankness and precision with which the positions had been stated. Yet he believed that agreement could be reached on the question of Laos. Yesterday, both sides had agreed that Laos was of no strategic importance and was not vital to either side.1 However, the United States became involved in Laos by treaty and other commitments. The President said that his interest was to secure a cease-fire and to stop the fighting. This, he thought, would be in the interest of both sides. Then a government could be secured which would not be weighted in either direction. The President referred to the remarks made yesterday regarding the situation in Burma and Cambodia, which appeared to be satisfactory to both sides, and said that agreement on Laos should be possible along the same lines. However, the first problem is to stop the fighting. In our view military activities are still going on in some areas of Laos. We have information that Viet Minh forces are involved, while Mr. Khrushchev said that Thais were involved. If the Co-Chairmen of the Conference were to instruct jointly theICC to make a determination as to the actual situation, the ICC should go to both sides and make its investigation. The President then referred to Mr. Khrushchevʼs statement yesterday in which he took issue with what he called the Dulles policy of strength. The President said he wanted to change US policy in this area because Laos was of no strategic importance. In the eyes of the world, both sides are involved in the Laotian situation; the United States wishes to reduce its involvement and hopes that the Soviet Union wishes the same. However, the President continued, as President he has certain responsibilities and if he changes US policy he must see that it works. The United States also wants to secure a government which both sides could support. If the situation can be changed, and Mr. Khrushchev said yesterday that it should be changed, then we could proceed with other matters. Laos is not so important as to get us as involved as we are.

Mr. Khrushchev said that he agreed with the Presidentʼs concluding remark. The Soviet Union has no commitment in Laos, has never undertaken any obligations in that area, and will not do so in the future. If the Soviet Union has helped Laos it has been only at the request of Souvanna Phouma, who represents the only legitimate Laotian Government. That Government was ousted by external forces supported by the US. This is why the Soviet Union cannot recognize any other government. The Soviet Union has no vested interest in Laos, either political or economic, or of any other nature. That country is far from Soviet borders. In general the Soviet Union has no desire of committing itself or assuming responsibilities in the various geographic areas. So when the President says that the United States has commitments, this makes a bad impression upon the USSR. The US has no right to distribute indulgences, as it were, and to interfere in the various areas of the world. Mr. Khrushchev said he liked the concluding part of the Presidentʼs remarks to the effect that the two countries should not get involved. This is a correct approach but it would be bad if the United States were to attempt to claim special rights on the grounds that it had vested interests. If the President would pardon the blunt expression, such policy stems from megalomania, from delusions of grandeur. The United States is so rich and powerful that it believes it has special rights and can afford not to recognize the rights of others. The Soviet Union cannot reconcile itself with such a situation and will not concede its own rights. The Soviet Union will also help other peoples obtain their independence. This is a correct policy. If we want to normalize the situation and prevent conflicts between our two countries anywhere in the world, the US should not seek any special rights. The Soviet Union cannot accept the thesis of “donʼt poke your nose” because wherever the rights of the people are infringed upon, the Soviet Union will render assistance to the people. This, of course, aggravates the situation and the Soviet Union does not wish such a development. The situation should be normalized. The US should respect the rights of other peoples, the Soviet people as well as other peoples. The Soviet Union does not wish to divide the world. It has no commitment anywhere other than toward the Socialist countries. On the other hand, the United States has spread its forces all over. But time has changed. As the President has stated, the forces of the two sides are not in balance. Mr. Khrushchev said that he was making this statement not for the purpose of argument but only to recognize this fact. A great deal of restraint is required because the factors of prestige and national interests are involved here. We should not step on each otherʼs toes and should not infringe upon the rights of other nations, small or big.

The President said that, frankly speaking, he had assumed office on January 20th and that the obligations and commitments had been undertaken before that time. Why these obligations and commitments were undertaken and what factors were involved at that time is not an issue here. The United States and the USSR should adopt the policy of creating a neutral and independent Laos. This is what the United States wants to do. The President reiterated that he did not want to increase US commitments but rather decrease them. There is no point in raking over past history to which Mr. Khrushchev objects. There are some facts in past history to which the United States also objects. But this is not an issue here. What is an issue here, is how to secure a cease-fire and to have the fighting stop. The United States wishes a government in Laos which would not be involved either with the United States or with the USSR, but would rather be genuinely neutral. The US went to the Conference with the genuine expectation that arrangements could be made to ensure an effective verification of the cease-fire and that the next step would be the creation of a truly neutral Laos. The United States does not believe that there is an effective cease-fire in Laos. But whatever the facts of past history we should now act in such a way as to pursue the policy of ensuring a truly neutral and independent Laos, which we believe is also Soviet policy.

Mr. Khrushchev replied that he could subscribe to everything the President had said and that he fully associated himself with the Presidentʼs remarks, which he liked very much. However, there was one point he wanted to make. The President had said that the Laotian situation was a legacy, but one could see in that situation the Presidentʼs own hand as well. The President had ordered that US military advisers in Laos should wear US military uniforms; he had also ordered a landing of Marines in Laos but the order had been rescinded.

The President interjected that there had been no order for a landing of Marines. True, there had been some speculation as to what action the US would take, but such an order had never been issued. Mr. Khrushchev responded by saying that he was referring to press reports.

Mr. Khrushchev went on to say that the Presidentʼs argument would be that all these commitments had been made by the previous administration. However, the Soviet Government has rescinded all the unreasonable decisions made by the previous governments under Malenkov and Bulganin.2 Mr. Khrushchev recalled the argument he had had with Molotov3 on the Austrian problem. As a result of his having overruled Molotov, a satisfactory solution of the problem was found and the US and the USSR signed the Austrian Treaty. Mr. Khrushchev said that he was sensitive with regard to US commitments. He said that the Westerners were much better than the Easterners at making threats in a refined way. Every once in a while it is intimated that Marines might be used. But as engineers know the law of physics says that every action causes counter-action. So if the United States were to send Marines, other countries might respond with their Marines or with some other forces. Thus another Korea or an even worse situation might result. Mr. Khrushchev repeated that he liked the Presidentʼs statement because it reflected the Soviet policy; in fact, the President seemed to have stated the Soviet policy and called it his own. The Soviet Union could guarantee that it would exert every effort to achieve a settlement. But this depends not merely on our two countries but on the three forces in Laos as well. Agreement between our two countries would be insufficient. However, we should influence the Laotian forces so that a truly neutral government could be established. Mr. Khrushchev said that he believed that the United States had no economic interest in Laos. The President had mentioned yesterday US strategic interests in connection with Taiwan. But this, as was mentioned yesterday, could mean that the United States could also take over Crimea because that would of course improve its strategic position too. Here the policies of the USSR and the US are not only in contrast but even in direct conflict. Such policy should be cast away and a reasonable policy should be adopted. In any event, the two Foreign Ministers could discuss the details of the Laotian question. They should be locked in a room and told to find a solution.

Mr. Gromyko interjected that the Palais des Nations in Geneva was a big place with a lot of rooms.

The President said that he wanted to make a comment on Mr. Khrushchevʼs statement regarding uniformed US personnel in Laos. He said that this action was taken when representatives of the Soviet Union and the UK were discussing in Moscow the question of effecting a cease-fire in Laos. When it became evident that no progress had been made the action was taken in order to prevent the situation from deteriorating further and to ensure a more favorable situation in which the conference could proceed. This is the kind of thing that happens when both sides are involved, and the United States would wish to avoid such developments.

Mr. Khrushchev then suggested that the questions of disarmament, nuclear tests and Germany be discussed now because otherwise there would not be enough time to do it.

The President replied that he wanted to make a final comment on the Laotian situation. He said that he was anxious to get the US military out of Laos. He had not supported and had been even reluctant to consider a landing of Marines, because he recognized that such action would entail retaliation and counteraction and thus peace in that area might be endangered. What he wanted to see in that area was an effective cease-fire and peaceful settlement. He said perhaps Mr. Khrushchev could use his influence on Gromyko to persuade him to cooperate in bringing about an effective cease-fire in Laos and let the ICC verify the cease-fire in an effective manner. That was the basis on which the United States had agreed to come to the conference. The President then suggested that perhaps the Secretary and Gromyko could discuss this question during lunch.4

Mr. Khrushchev said he could add little to what had already been said. He agreed that a cease-fire should be sought. However, other questions should not be delayed by lack of a cease-fire. The point is that the situation at front lines is always unstable and even a shot fired accidentally by a soldier could be regarded by the other side as a violation of the cease-fire. Therefore, other questions should not be made contingent upon a cease-fire. However, the President should not misunderstand this position. The USSR believes that the question of a cease-fire should be handled on a priority basis, but the basic question is to bring about agreement among the three forces in Laos, so that the formation of a truly neutral government could be secured. Mr. Khrushchev agreed that no normal conditions for settlement would exist in the absence of a cease-fire. However, he was not aware of any fighting going on; if the United States had contrary information, it should be verified.

Mr. Gromyko remarked that the ICC was already in Laos and that it could act by agreement of both sides. In response to an inquiry by the Secretary, Mr. Gromyko clarified that what he meant by both sides were the two sides fighting in Laos. The ICC should not be granted the rights of a supragovernment.

The President reiterated his hope that the Secretary and Mr. Gromyko could discuss this problem briefly during lunch.

Mr. Khrushchev then addressed himself to the question of nuclear weapon tests. He said he would not go into any details because the positions of the two sides were well known. Furthermore, he was not familiar with all the details of this intricate problem. However, there were two basic questions: (1) the number of suspicious events to be inspected and (2) organization of control. The Soviet Union cannot accept such controls as have been suggested so far. The events in the Congo taught the Soviet Union a lesson. Before those events the Soviet Union might have signed a treaty like the one suggested. However, the events in the Congo indicated that the UN appears to be able to act against the interests of individual states. The Congo had invited UN troops and those troops acted against the interests of the Congolese Government. So if there is a single chairman of the control commission (Mr. Khrushchev was obviously referring to the administrator) he will be able to set the policy. The US would not agree to having a Communist chairman and that is understandable. If it did then the Soviet Union could accept a single chairman (administrator). But the Soviet Union cannot accept a neutral chairman; after all, Hammarskjold is also a neutral and an intelligent one at that. He is not the worst neutral possible. One should try to imagine a situation, Mr. Khrushchev said, where he, as Prime Minister of the Soviet Union, would have to subject his actions to such a commission (administrator). The people of the Soviet Union would never accept such a situation and if the United States wants him to be fired then it should pursue this line. The Soviet Union does not seek control over the control organization but it does not wish the United States to have such control either. This is why the USSR has proposed a three-man body. Such an arrangement would not be prejudicial to any of the sides. Mr. Khrushchev said that he believed that the work of other international organizations should be organized along the same lines. He said that the United States was now in the majority in the UN, but times may change—one cannot say when—and the US may find itself in a minority. The UN is not a parliament, it is an international organization and the majority rule has no place there. Each group of countries should be equally represented, so that a balance of forces be established and that no one be able to pursue a policy prejudicial to any other side. Referring to the number of inspections, Mr. Khrushchev said that three inspections a year would be sufficient. A larger number would be tantamount to intelligence, something the Soviet Union cannot accept. Mr. Khrushchev then said that he wanted to link the question of nuclear tests with disarmament. If agreement could be reached on disarmament, then the USSR could agree to any controls and it would then drop the troika arrangement and the requirement for unanimity. The Soviet position on disarmament is well known; it was stated at the UN and the USSR still proceeds on that basis. Under the conditions of general and complete disarmament control must be most extensive so that no country could arm itself clandestinely. If there were general and complete disarmament there would be no question of espionage because there would be no armaments. Then there would be no secrets and all doors must be open so that complete verification could be ensured. This would include nuclear plants. In view of the fact that apparently no agreement can be reached on the question of nuclear tests, this question should be linked to disarmament. The disarmament group should combine the two questions and work out a general plan. Given good will, two years should be sufficient to develop an agreement on general and complete disarmament. Mr. Khrushchev said that he could give the President an aide-memoire setting forth the Soviet position on this question. (The aide-memoire was received from the Soviets after the meeting.)5

The President said that he wanted to ask Mr. Khrushchev whether he believed it to be impossible to find any person that would be neutral both to the US and the USSR.

Mr. Khrushchev replied in the affirmative.

The President then said that the result of the Soviet proposal could be compared to a situation where if he were living in this room and Mr. Khrushchev in the adjacent room, they could not go to each otherʼs rooms without the consent of the occupant. Under such conditions, how could any of the two be certain that nothing suspicious is going on in his neighborʼs room. The President then said that a treaty along such lines could not be confirmed by the Senate. In sending any treaty to the Senate the President would have to give assurance that the treaty provides if not for a fool-proof control system, at least for a reasonable deterrent against violations. However, if the Soviet proposal were accepted, no such assurance could be given. Likewise, how could Mr. Khrushchev give such assurance to those people in his country who may think that the United States is testing clandestinely. True, Mr. Khrushchev is in an advantageous position because of the open way in which the United States acts.

Mr. Khrushchev smiled and said: “But what about Allen Dulles?6 Isnʼt that secret?” The President replied he wished it were. Furthermore, the President continued, how can we inspect events in the Soviet Union if any such inspection would be subject to Soviet approval? Under such an agreement any party that might have tested clandestinely would simply refuse to accept inspection in the area where the test had occurred.

Mr. Khrushchev referred to his statement about three inspections a year to verify suspicious events and also noted that the President had failed to address himself to his statement regarding the dropping of the troika proposal if nuclear tests were linked with disarmament. If this arrangement were adopted, then full control could be exercised any time and at any place. Mr. Khrushchev went on to say that a nuclear test ban alone would not be very important to the national security of the people. The danger of war would remain, because the production of nuclear energy, rockets, and bombs would continue full blast. What people want is peace. Therefore, agreement should be reached on general and complete disarmament. Then the troika would be dropped and the USSR would subscribe to any controls developed by the US, even without looking at the document.

The President said that he agreed that a nuclear test ban would not of itself lessen the number of nuclear weapons possessed by the USSR and the US. Nor would it reduce the production of such weapons. However, a test ban would make development of nuclear weapons by other countries less likely, although, of course, no one can guess what will happen in the future. At this time, the United States and the USSR possess great stocks of nuclear weapons; Great Britain possesses certain quantities of such weapons and France is also getting some capability. If we fail to reach agreement on a nuclear test ban then other countries will undoubtedly launch a nuclear weapons program. While a nuclear test ban would be no certain guarantee against the proliferation of nuclear weapons, it would certainly impede such proliferation. If no agreement is reached, then in a few years there might be ten or even fifteen nuclear powers. So in considering this question of what Mr. Khrushchev calls espionage one should balance its risks against the risks involved in the proliferation of nuclear weapons. If we are successful in reaching agreement on a nuclear test ban then it will certainly at least put a brake on the spread of nuclear weapons.

Mr. Khrushchev agreed that there was some logic in the Presidentʼs position and said that this was why the Soviet Union had entered the negotiations. However, practice has demonstrated that this logic is not quite correct because while the three powers are negotiating in Geneva, France simply spits at them and goes on testing. Thus if there is no link between a nuclear test ban and disarmament other countries may say that they are in an unequal position and might act like France. Other countries may say that if the great powers possess stockpiles of nuclear weapons they should also acquire such stockpiles. On the other hand, if there were disarmament, then nuclear weapons would be eliminated and other countries would be in an equal position and would not have to spend money on the development of nuclear weapons. General and complete disarmament is the most radical means of preventing war. The Soviet Union has always regarded the question of a nuclear test ban merely as a small step toward general and complete disarmament. But let us now begin with the main issue and include the test ban in it.

The President said he agreed that a test ban would not be a basic part, but it would be a most important part. He said that the treaty as drafted now provides for abrogation of the treaty if any country associated with any party to the treaty should conduct tests. The United States does not support French testing. We hope that once a treaty has been concluded most other countries will join in it. The question of a nuclear test ban is a relatively easy problem to resolve because the controls required are based on scientific instrumentation, such as seismographs, etc. So why not start with this relatively easy question. The President then inquired whether the Soviet conception was that if we used the term general and complete disarmament—or general and comprehensive disarmament as used by us last year—the process would be carried out step by step with the necessary parallel inspection. Or is it the Soviet view that we would simply announce that goal as an objective of national policy and countries would carry out inspection on their own.

Mr. Khrushchev replied he wanted to make a complaint: The President apparently had not read the Soviet proposals with sufficient attention. Otherwise, he would know that the Soviet proposals provide for disarmament in stages and for control in stages.

The President then inquired whether this was to be understood that, if both sides accepted general and complete disarmament and agreed to reduce their armed forces, the number of their aircraft or submarines, or to disarm outer space, the Soviet Union would accept inspection any place in the USSR.

Mr. Khrushchev replied in the affirmative, using the word “absolutely”.

In other words, the President inquired further, if general and complete disarmament were accepted as a commitment of national policy and a nuclear test ban were included in the first stage, would that mean that the test ban would be subject to inspection without a veto?

Mr. Khrushchev replied that in that event he would try to persuade the President not to start with this measure because it is not the most important one.

In response to the Presidentʼs question what should come first, Mr. Khrushchev replied that any other measure would be acceptable, such as, for instance, prohibition of nuclear weapons, prohibition of the manufacture of such weapons, or elimination of military and missile bases. (At this point Mr. Gromyko corrected the interpreter saying that Mr. Khrushchev had not mentioned prohibition of the manufacture of nuclear weapons. However, Mr. Khrushchev confirmed that he had mentioned this item.) The Soviet proposals on disarmament contain all the details and there is logic in those proposals. The proposals also provide for complete control. In any event, both sides should try to reach agreement on the priority of individual measures so that neither side would have its interests prejudiced by the other.

The President said that Mr. Khrushchev appeared to feel that a link should be established between a nuclear test ban and disarmament and that these two questions are inter-related and should be discussed together. We, on the other hand, believe that a nuclear test ban would be if not the most important step, at least a very significant step and would facilitate a disarmament agreement. There is a Chinese proverb saying that a thousand-mile journey begins with one step. So let us make that step.

Mr. Khrushchev rejoined by saying that the President apparently knew the Chinese very well but that he too knew them quite well. To this the President replied that Mr. Khrushchev might get to know them even better. Mr. Khrushchev retorted that he already knew them very well.

Referring to the Presidentʼs statement about the significance of a nuclear test ban, Mr. Khrushchev said that the USSR could agree to a nuclear test ban provided it was subject to the troika arrangement.

The President then said that it appeared to him that the conversation was back where it had started. Therefore, he wanted to conclude this discussion by saying that the United States is greatly concerned by the uninspected moratorium that has been going on for three years in connection with the negotiations. This indicates how long it takes to reach agreements. The prospect of an indefinite continuance of a moratorium without controls is a matter of great concern to the United States. Therefore, it is difficult to envisage how the question of nuclear tests could be included in disarmament negotiations, which we hope will be successful but which will probably require a long time. Perhaps it would be best to go back to Geneva to make another effort and to see what each of us should do in this matter. Perhaps then the conference might be recessed or some other action taken. Whether or not there is agreement on nuclear tests we would start our discussions on disarmament on June 19.

Mr. Khrushchev replied that he was agreeable to conducting negotiations in Geneva and said that there was a Soviet representative there. However, the Soviet Union could not accept such controls as would be tantamount to espionage if weapons themselves were not eliminated. This, in effect, is what the Pentagon has wanted all along. Eisenhowerʼs open skies proposal in 19557 was a part of that scheme. Now ground posts are envisaged and this is also reconnaissance. The Soviet Union has agreed to negotiate on a nuclear test ban in the hope of reaching agreement and proceeding to general and complete disarmament. If the US refuses to accept general and complete disarmament then the Soviet Union cannot agree to accept such an arrangement. The Soviet Union cannot accept a situation where controls would prejudice its national security and where the Soviet Government would be subject to the will of a third party and would not be free to act on its own.

The President said that it was obvious that if controls should turn out to be prejudicial to the national interest of any of the parties to an unreasonable degree, the treaty could be abrogated. The President reiterated that we would begin our discussions on disarmament on June 19, which will be in effect a continuation of the discussion Mr. Gromyko and Mr. Stevenson had had in New York.

Mr. Khrushchev inquired whether the President would agree to tie together the question of the test ban and disarmament.

The President replied that he would not unless there was assurance that agreement on disarmament could be reached speedily. He referred to the fact that negotiations on a nuclear test ban had been in process for three years. The President emphasized that the problem of espionage mentioned by Mr. Khrushchev paled if compared with the problems which would result from the development of nuclear capabilities by other countries. This is bound to affect the national security of our two countries, and increase the danger of major conflicts.

Mr. Khrushchev said that if we agreed on general and complete disarmament that problem would not only pale but would completely disappear.

Turning to the question of Germany, Mr. Khrushchev said that he wanted to set forth his position. He said that he understands that this will affect the relations between our two countries to a great extent and even more so if the US were to misunderstand the Soviet position. Conversely, if the US understood the Soviet position correctly our two countries would be brought closer together rather than be divided. Sixteen years have passed since World War II. The USSR lost 20 million people in that War and many of its areas were devastated. Now Germany, the country which unleased World War II, has again acquired military power and has assumed a predominant position in NATO. Its generals hold high offices in that organization. This constitutes a threat of World War III which would be even more devastating than World War II. The USSR believes that a line should be drawn under World War II. There is no explanation why there is no peace treaty 16 years after the war. This is why the USSR has suggested that a peace conference be convened. In this connection, the USSR proceeds from the actual state of affairs, namely, that two German States exist. Our own wishes or efforts notwithstanding, a united Germany is not practical because the Germans themselves do not want it. No delay in the matter of signing a peace treaty is justifiable and only West German militarists gain from such a delay. A peace treaty would not prejudice the interests of the US, the UK, or France; on the contrary, these interests would be best served by a peace treaty. The present situation looks as if the US opposes a peace treaty while the USSR wants it. Mr. Khrushchev said that he wanted the President to understand him correctly. He would like to reach agreement with the President—and he said he wanted to emphasize the words “with you”—on this question. If the US should fail to understand this desire the USSR will sign a peace treaty alone. The USSR will sign a peace treaty with the GDR and with the FRG if the latter so desires. If not, a peace treaty will be signed with the GDR alone. Then the state of war will cease and all commitments stemming from Germanyʼs surrender will become invalid. This would include all institutions, occupation rights, and access to Berlin, including the corridors. A free city of West Berlin will be established and there will be no blockade or interference in the internal affairs of the city. West Berlin should have a clearly defined status. If the US desires, guarantees could be given to ensure non-interference and the cityʼs ties with the outside world. If the US wants to leave its troops in West Berlin, that would be acceptable under certain conditions; however, the Soviet Union believes that in that case Soviet troops should be there too. Likewise, the USSR would be agreeable to having neutral troops stationed in Berlin. UN guarantees would be acceptable as well. The USSR would be prepared to join the US in ensuring all the conditions necessary for preserving what the West calls West Berlinʼs freedom. However, if the US rejects this proposal—and the USSR will regard such an action as having been made under the pressure of Adenauer—the USSR will sign a peace treaty unilaterally and all rights of access to Berlin will expire because the state of war will cease to exist.

The President said that first of all he wanted to express his appreciation of the fact that Mr. Khrushchev had set forth his views in such a frank manner. At the same time the discussion here is not only about the legal situation but also about the practical facts which affect very much our national security. Here, we are not talking about Laos. This matter is of greatest concern to the US. We are in Berlin not because of someoneʼs sufferance. We fought our way there, although our casualties may have been not as high as the USSRʼs. We are in Berlin not by agreement of East Germans but by contractual rights. This is an area where every President of the US since World War II had been committed by treaty and other contractual rights and where every President has reaffirmed his faithfulness to his obligations. If we were expelled from that area and if we accepted the loss of our rights no one would have any confidence in US commitments and pledges. US national security is involved in this matter because if we were to accept the Soviet proposal US commitments would be regarded as a mere scrap of paper. West Europe is vital to our national security and we have supported it in two wars. If we were to leave West Berlin Europe would be abandoned as well. So when we are talking about West Berlin we are also talking about West Europe. The President said he would like to see the relations between our two countries develop in a favorable direction so that some arrangement could be found. Mr. Khrushchev seems to agree that the ratios of power today are equal. Therefore, it is difficult to understand why a country with high achievements in such areas as outer space and economic progress should now suggest that we leave an area where we have vital interests. How can the US agree to East Germanyʼs preventing it from exercising our rights we had won by war? The United States cannot accept an ultimatum. Our leaving West Berlin would result in the US becoming isolated. The President emphasized that he is not President of the US to preside over isolation of his country just as Mr. Khrushchev, as leader of the USSR, would not want to see his own country isolated.

Mr. Khrushchev interjected that he understood this to mean that the President did not want a peace treaty. He said that the Presidentʼs statement about US national security could mean that the US might wish to go to Moscow because that too would, of course, improve its position.

The President replied that the US was not asking to go anywhere; we were not talking about the US going to Moscow or of the USSR going to New York. What we are talking about is that we are in Berlin and have been there for 15 years. We suggest that we stay there.

The President continued by saying that the US was interested in maintaining its position in Berlin and its rights of access to that city. He said he recognized that the situation there is not a satisfactory one; he also recognized that in the conversations Mr. Khrushchev had had with former President Eisenhower the term “abnormal” had been used to describe that situation. However, because conditions in many areas of the world are not satisfactory today it is not the right time now to change the situation in Berlin and the balance in general. The United States does not wish to effect such a change. The US is not asking the USSR to change its position but it is simply saying that it should not seek to change our position and thus disturb the balance of power. If this balance should change the situation in West Europe as a whole would change and this would be a most serious blow to the US. Mr. Khrushchev would not accept similar loss and we cannot accept it either. The question is not that of a peace treaty with East Germany but rather of other aspects of this proposal which would affect our access to Berlin and our rights there.

Mr. Khrushchev said that he was sorry that he had met with no understanding of the Soviet position. The US is unwilling to normalize the situation in the most dangerous spot in the world. The USSR wants to perform an operation on this sore spot—to eliminate this thorn, this ulcer—without prejudicing the interests of any side, but rather to the satisfaction of all peoples of the world. It wants to do that not by intrigue or threat but by solemnly signing a peace treaty. Now the President says that this action is directed against the interests of the US. Such statement is difficult to understand indeed. No change in existing boundaries is proposed; a peace treaty would only formalize them. The USSR wants a peace treaty because such a treaty would impede those people who want a new war. Revanchists in West Germany will find in a peace treaty a barrier impeding their activities. Today they say that boundaries should be changed. But if a peace treaty is signed there will be no ground for revision of the boundaries. Hitler spoke of Germanyʼs need for Lebensraum to the Urals. Now Hitlerʼs generals, who had helped him in his designs to execute his plans, are high commanders in NATO. This logic cannot be understood and the USSR cannot accept it. Mr. Khrushchev said he was very sorry but he had to assure the President that no force in the world would prevent theUSSR from signing a peace treaty. 16 years have passed since World War II and how long should the signing of a peace treaty be delayed? Another 16 years, another 30 years? No further delay is possible or necessary. As far as US losses in the last war are concerned, losses are difficult to measure. Loss of a drop of blood equals the loss of a pint of blood in the minds of those who shed that blood. The US lost thousands and the USSR lost millions, but American mothers mourn their sons just as deeply as Soviet mothers shed tears over the loss of their beloved ones. Mr. Khrushchev said that he himself had lost a son in the last war; Mr. Gromyko lost two brothers, and Mikoyan a son. There is not a single family in the USSR or the leadership of the USSR that did not lose at least one of its members in the war. Mr. Khrushchev continued by saying that he wanted the US to understand correctly the Soviet position. This position is advanced not for the purpose of kindling passions or increasing tensions. The objective is just the opposite—to remove the obstacles that stand in the way of development of our relations and to normalize relations throughout the world. The USSR will sign a peace treaty and the sovereignty of the GDR will be observed. Any violation of that sovereignty will be regarded by the USSR as an act of open aggression against a peace-loving country, with all the consequences ensuing therefrom.

The President inquired whether such a peace treaty would block access to Berlin. Mr. Khrushchev said that it would.

The President then said that the US is opposed to a buildup in West Germany that would constitute a threat to the Soviet Union. The decision to sign a peace treaty is a serious one and the USSR should consider it in the light of its national interests. Referring to the question of boundaries, the President said that General De Gaulle had made a statement on this question.8 This problem has been discussed in the Western world and there is some division of opinion on this matter. However, the US is committed to the defense of Western Europe and has assisted Western Europe in the past. The President said that one of his brothers had been killed in the last war, when the US came to Western Europeʼs assistance. If the US were driven out of West Berlin by unilateral action, and if we were deprived of our contractual rights by East Germany, then no one would believe the US now or in the future. US commitments would be regarded as a mere scrap of paper. The world situation today is that of change and no one can predict what the evolution will be in such areas as Asia or Africa. Yet what Mr. Khrushchev suggests is to bring about a basic change in the situation overnight and deny us our rights which we share with the other two Western countries. This presents us with a most serious challenge and no one can foresee how serious the consequences might be. The President said it had not been his wish to come here to Vienna to find out not only that a peace treaty would be signed but also that we would be denied our position in West Berlin and our access to that city. In fact, the President said, he had come here in the hope that relations between our two countries could be improved. The President stressed he hoped that Mr. Khrushchev would consider his responsibility toward his country and also consider the responsibility the President of the United States has toward his people. What is discussed here is not only West Berlin; we are talking here about Western Europe and the United States as well.

Mr. Khrushchev replied that he could not understand the Presidentʼs reference to Western Europe. The USSR does not wish any change; it merely wants to formalize the situation which has resulted from World War II. The fact is that West Germany is in the Western group of nations and the USSR recognizes this. East Germany is an ally of the socialist countries and this should be recognized as a fait accompli. East Germany has now demarcation lines and these lines should become borders. The Polish and Czech borders should be formalized. The position of the GDR should be normalized and her sovereignty ensured. To do all this it is necessary to eliminate the occupation rights in West Berlin. No such rights should exist there. It would be impossible to imagine a situation where the USSR would have signed a peace treaty with the US retaining occupation rights, which are based on the state of war. The US may say that its blood was shed, but the USSR shed blood too and not water.

The President interjected that our rights were based on a four-power agreement. Mr. Khrushchev replied that this was so in the absence of a peace treaty, but said that a peace treaty would end the state of war and those rights would therefore expire.

The President said this meant unilateral abrogation of the four-power agreement by the USSR and emphasized that the US could not accept such an act. Mr. Khrushchev replied that this was not so because the USSR would invite the US to sign a peace treaty and would sign it alone only if the US should refuse to do so. In that event the US could not maintain its rights on the territory of theGDR. The President again referred to the four-power agreement, but Mr. Khrushchev replied that the USSR considered all of Berlin to be GDR territory. The President stated this may be Soviet view but not ours. If the USSR transfers its rights, that is a matter for its own decision; however, it is an altogether different matter for the USSR to give our rights which we have on contractual basis. He said that the USSR could not break the agreement and give US rights to the GDR. Mr. Khrushchev rejoined by saying that this was a familiar point of view but had no juridical foundation, since the war had ended 17 years ago. In fact, President Roosevelt indicated that troops could be withdrawn after two or two and a half years.

Mr. Khrushchev continued by saying that all the USSR wants is a peace treaty. He could not understand why the US wants Berlin. Does the US want to unleash a war from there? The President as a naval officer and he himself, a civilian although he participated in two wars, know very well that Berlin has no military significance. The President speaks of rights, but what are those rights? They stem from war. If the state of war ends, the rights end too. If a peace treaty is signed US prestige will not be involved, and everybody will understand this. But if the US should maintain its rights after the signing of a peace treaty, that would be a violation of East Germanyʼs sovereignty and of the sovereignty of the socialist camp as a whole. Mr. Khrushchev recalled that President Eisenhower had agreed that the situation in Germany was abnormal. Eisenhower had said that US prestige was involved. Then the possibility of an interim agreement was discussed, an arrangement that would not involve the prestige of our two countries. Perhaps this could serve as a basis for agreement. The USSR is prepared to accept such an arrangement even now. Adenauer says that he wants unification but this is not so. As far as unification is concerned, we should say that the two German governments should meet and decide the question of reunification. A time limit of say 6 months should be set and if there is no agreement we can disavow our responsibilities and then anyone would be free to conclude a peace treaty. This would be a way out and it would resolve this question of prestige, which, Mr. Khrushchev said, he did not really understand. Mr. Khrushchev said that he had hoped that Eisenhower would agree subsequently at the Summit, but the forces which are against improvement of relations between the US and USSR sent the U-2 plane and theUSSR decided that in view of the tensions prevailing as a result of that flight this question should not be raised. However, the USSR believes that time for such action is ripe now. Mr. Khrushchev expressed regret on his own behalf and on behalf of his colleagues and allies at not having found understanding on the Presidentʼs part of the Soviet Unionʼs good intentions and motivations. If only the German question were resolved the road would be clear for the development of our mutual relations. The USSR does not want to infringe upon anybodyʼs interests, but neither would it concede its own interests. Mr. Khrushchev said he believed that the US does not want territorial gains although there is ideological disagreement between the US and the USSR. However, ideological disagreements should not be transferred onto the plane of a devastating war. He said that he was confident that people would be reasonable enough not to act like crusaders in the Middle Ages and would not start cutting each otherʼs throats for ideological reasons. If the United States disagreed with the Soviet proposal it should at least understand the Soviet position. TheUSSR can no longer delay. It will probably sign a peace treaty at the end of the year, with all the ensuing consequences, i.e., all obligations will come to an end. The status of West Berlin as a free city will be guaranteed and complete non-interference will be ensured. West Berlin will be accessible to all countries with which it will want to maintain ties. However, access will be subject to GDRʼs control, since communication lines go through its territory. If the US is concerned about what it calls freedom of West Berlin, let us develop guarantees jointly or invite the UN. No nation will understand the US position of perpetuating the state of war with Germany. The USSR will explain its position to the world. It wants to prevent the possibility of war. If the US refuses to sign a peace treaty, the USSR will have no way out other than to sign such a treaty alone. TheUSSR lost 20 million people in the last war while the US lost 350 thousand.

The President interjected that this was why the US wanted to prevent another war.

Mr. Khrushchev continued by saying that if the US should start a war over Berlin there was nothing the USSR could do about it. However, it would have to be the US to start the war, while the USSR will be defending peace. History will be the judge of our actions. The West has been saying that Khrushchev might miscalculate. But ours is a joint account and each of us must see that there is no miscalculation. If the US wants to start a war over Germany let it be so; perhaps the USSR should sign a peace treaty right away and get over with it. This is what the Pentagon has been wanting. However, Adenauer and Macmillan know very well what war means. If there is any madman who wants war, he should be put in a straight jacket. Nations close to USSR territory know what war will mean for them. The USSR thinks of peace, of friendship, and it is happy with its trade relations with West Germany, France, Great Britain and Italy. It is not by accident that trade between the US and the USSR is still frozen but that is a problem for the US. So this is the Soviet position. The USSR will sign a peace treaty at the end of this year. Mr. Khrushchev concluded by saying that he was confident that common sense would win and peace will prevail.

The President said he recognized that the situation in Germany was abnormal. Germany is divided today. When President Roosevelt talked about the withdrawal of troops he was not able to foresee this situation or the fact that our two countries would be on different sides. The US does not want to precipitate a crisis; it is Mr. Khrushchev who wants to do so by seeking a change in the existing situation. The President then said the US was committed to this area long before he had assumed a position of high government responsibility. Now Mr. Khrushchev suggests a peace treaty at the end of the year, which would deny our rights in that city and our rights of access. Mr. Khrushchev knows very well that Berlin is much more than a city and yet he makes such a suggestion. Is that a way to secure peace?

Mr. Khrushchev replied he did not understand how the signing of a peace treaty could worsen the world situation. Peace is always regarded as something beneficial while the state of war is regarded as something evil.

The President said that the signing of a peace treaty is not a belligerent act. He had not indicated this at all. However, a peace treaty denying us our contractual rights is a belligerent act. The matter of a peace treaty with East Germany is a matter for Mr. Khrushchevʼs judgment and is not a belligerent act. What is a belligerent act is transfer of our rights to East Germany. West Berlin is not important as a springboard. However, the US is committed to that area and it is so regarded by all the world. If we accepted Mr. Khrushchevʼs suggestion the world would lose confidence in the US and would not regard it as a serious country. It is an important strategic matter that the world believe the US is a serious country.

Mr. Khrushchev wondered what he should do in these circumstances. He said he believed that US intentions led to nothing good. The USSR would never, under any conditions, accept US rights in West Berlin after a peace treaty had been signed. He said he was absolutely convinced that the peoples of the world would understand such a position. Moreover, the US had deprived theUSSR unilaterally of its rights and interests in West Germany, it had deprived the USSR of reparations in West Germany, and it had signed a unilateral peace treaty with Japan. As a result of this latter action the Soviet Union still has no peace treaty with Japan.

The President interjected that Mr. Khrushchev had said to President Eisenhower that he would have signed the treaty. Mr. Khrushchev confirmed this, while Mr. Gromyko said that the fact remained that the US had signed the Japanese peace treaty without the Soviet Union.

Mr. Khrushchev went on to say that the US regarded all this as appropriate, but now it says what the USSR wants to do is immoral. The USSR would like to do it together with the US but if the US refuses to sign a peace treaty the USSR will do it alone. East Germany will obtain complete sovereignty and all obligations resulting from German surrender will be annulled. The factor of the USSRʼs prestige should be taken into account. What the US wants is to retain the rights gained after World War II even after a peace treaty has been signed. This is a policy of “I do what I want”. The USSR regards East Germany as a completely sovereign state and it will sign a peace treaty with it. Responsibility for violation of that sovereignty will be heavy.

The President said that there is every evidence that our position in Berlin is strongly supported by the people there, and we are committed to that area. Mr. Khrushchev says that we are for a state of war. This is incorrect. It would be well if relations between East Germany and West Germany improved and if the development of US-USSR relations were such as to permit solution of the whole German problem. During his stay in office, Mr. Khrushchev has seen many changes, and changes will go on. But now he wants a peace treaty in six months, an action which would drive us out of Berlin. If we accepted such a proposition we would lose our ties in West Europe and would lose all our friends there. We do not wish to act in a way that would deprive the Soviet Union of its ties in Eastern Europe. Mr. Khrushchev had said that the President was a young man, but, the President continued, he had not assumed office to accept arrangements totally inimical to US interests. The President said he was prepared to discuss any problem but Mr. Khrushchev should take into account our interests just as he says we should take into account his views.

Mr. Khrushchev said that then an interim agreement should be concluded. However, no matter how long a time limit such an agreement were to provide for, the Germans would not agree because no one wishes reunification. An interim agreement would be a formal factor, it would give the semblance of the responsibility for the problem having been turned over to the Germans themselves. If the US does not wish such an arrangement there is no other way but to sign a peace treaty unilaterally. No one can force the US to sign a peace treaty but neither can the US make the Soviet Union accept its claims. Mr. Khrushchev then said that an aide-memoire on the Berlin question9 had been prepared so that the US could study the Soviet position and perhaps return to this question at a later date, if it wished to do so.

The group then moved to the dining room for lunch.



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, Presidentʼs Office Files, USSR. Secret. Drafted by Akalovsky. According to another copy the memorandum of conversation was approved by the White House on June 23. (Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 1901) The meeting was held at the Soviet Embassy. A summary of the conversation was transmitted in Secto 25 from Vienna, June 5, (Ibid., Central Files, 751J.00/6-561)

1 See Document 86.

2 Georgi M. Malenkov, Chairman of the Soviet Council of Ministers until February 1955; Nikolai A. Bulganin, Chairman of the Soviet Council of Ministers until 1958.

3 Vyacheslav M. Molotov, Soviet Foreign Minister until May 1956.

4 For a brief discussion of Laos at lunch, see Document 88.

5 For the text of this aide-memoire, see Department of State Bulletin, July 3, 1961, pp. 22-24.

6 Allen W. Dulles, Director of Central Intelligence.

7 For text of this proposal, July 21, 1955, see Foreign Relations, 1955-1957, vol. V, pp. 450-453.

8 For a transcript of De Gaulleʼs press conference on March 25, 1959, when he discussed German boundaries, and his reiteration of the French view on November 10, 1959, see Major Addresses, Statements and Press Conferences of General Charles de Gaulle, May 19, 1958-January 31, 1964, pp. 41-51 and 57-70.

9 For text of this aide-memoire, see Department of State Bulletin, August 7, 1961, pp. 231-233.





88. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Vienna, June 4, 1961.

SUBJECT

Vienna Meeting Between The President and Chairman Khrushchev



PARTICIPANTS

Listed on Page 5



During lunch the following points of interest emerged: 1. Mr. Khrushchev said he had not had the good fortune of meeting Lenin.

2. Mr. Khrushchev referred to the obsolescence of naval surface ships such as cruisers and carriers. He said that the Soviet Union had switched to the production of submarines, particularly of submarines designed to combat other vessels. On the other hand, US submarines are designed to attack land masses. Of course, theUSSR has such submarines too. Mr. Khrushchev then expressed the view that missiles are the God of War today and said that they had three types of missiles in production: short-range, medium-range, and inter-continental.

3. Mr. Khrushchev said he had heard that pressure was being brought to bear on the President to resume nuclear weapon tests. He said that he was under a similar pressure; however, theUSSR will wait for the US to resume testing and if the US does resume the USSR will follow suit.

4. Mr. Khrushchev said he was placing certain restraints on projects for a flight to the moon. Such an operation is very expensive and this may weaken Soviet defenses. Of course, Soviet scientists want to go to the moon, but the US should go first because it is rich and then the Soviet Union will follow.

5. In response to the Presidentʼs inquiry whether perhaps a cooperative effort could be made in that direction, Mr. Khrushchev said that cooperation in outer space would be impossible as long as there was no disarmament. The reason for this is that rockets are used for both military and scientific purposes. The President said that perhaps coordination in timing of such efforts could be achieved in order to save money. This would not involve Soviet rockets. Mr. Khrushchev replied that this might be possible but noted that so far there had been few practical uses of outer space launchings. The race was costly and was primarily for prestige purposes.

6. Mr. Khrushchev said that he had read the Presidentʼs defense message2 and that in reading it he had thought that perhaps the USSR should also increase its land forces and artillery. The President observed that the US was not planning to increase its armed forces except for 10,000 Marines to bring three Marine Corps divisions up to full strength.

7. During a brief discussion of the Laotian situation, Mr. Gromyko said that the difference between the Secretary and himself was that Mr. Rusk wanted the ICC to be free to go to any point in the country. On the other hand, the Soviet view is that the purpose of the ICC is to verify the cease-fire and that, therefore, the ICC should be allowed to go only to points along the front line where clashes occur.

8. In his toast to the President, Mr. Khrushchev said that he was very happy to meet the President and to be able to exchange views with him. He said he preferred as much as possible to have personal contacts. This is always better than to act through even the best possible Ambassadors. He quoted a joke that natural love is better than love through interpreters. He said that he always preferred contacts and did not like to evade crucial issues. If leaders of states cannot resolve the most complex problems between themselves, how can officials at a lower level accomplish that task. This is why he prefers personal meetings, where he can listen to the position of the other side and set forth his own. He said he had heard the Presidentʼs position and had set forth his own. At this time, apparently no understanding has been reached between the two sides. However, if people could resolve all difficult questions in their first meeting, no difficult questions would exist. Noting that he was speaking on behalf of the Soviet Government and on behalf of the USSRʼs friends in the Warsaw Pact who are interested in a peace treaty with Germany, Mr. Khrushchev said that he wanted to stress that they are for peace. The President might agree or disagree with this, but, Mr. Khrushchev said, he wanted to assure the President that the USSRʼs motives are sincere. He wanted the President to understand that when the USSR undertook this action, it would not be directed against the US or its allies. The Soviet Union wants to remove the roadblocks that stand in the way. This is a painful process and it is similar to a surgical operation. However, the USSR wants to cross that bridge and it will cross it. Evidently US-USSR relations will sustain great tensions as a result of that but, Mr. Khrushchev said, he is sure that the clouds will dissipate, the sun will come out again and will shine brightly. The US does not want Berlin, neither does the Soviet Union. It is true that US prestige is involved in this matter, but the only party really interested in Berlin as such is Adenauer. He is an intelligent man but old. The Soviet Union cannot agree to having the old and moribund hold back the young and vigorous. Strauss3 is the most aggressive-minded man in West Germany, but even a man like himself, whose mind is in the eclipse, can apparently see the light. On one occasion Strauss wisely admitted that he fully understood how greatly Germany would suffer in a new war and how complete its destruction would be. This was a very wise remark. So let us try to remove the seeds that engender conflicts. Mr Khrushchev said that he understood the Presidentʼs position was a difficult one; his allies may raise the question of why the US should be speaking on their behalf. However, the allies of the USSR feel the same and are jealous about their rights. Mr. Khrushchev said that he was sure that if a US ally like Luxembourg were to raise its voice, there would be no problem for the President. He said he did not wish to name some of his own allies who, if they were to raise a belligerent voice, would not frighten anyone. However, the situation would be quite different if our two countries were to clash. Mr. Khrushchev then raised his glass to the solution of those problems. The President is a religious man and would say that God should help us in this endeavor. For his part, Mr. Khrushchev said, he wanted common sense to help us find solutions to our problems.

9. In his reply, the President expressed his appreciation of this opportunity to meet the Chairman and said that the reason why he had been anxious to meet with him was that he felt that our two countries were strong and that our peoples wanted peace and continued progress toward a better life. He also felt that a meeting between the Chairman and himself would be in the interest of world relations generally. The President then said that while the talks had been wide-ranging, he appreciated the atmosphere in which they had taken place. As he had told Mr. Gromyko, his ambition was to prevent a direct confrontation between the US and the USSR in this era of evolution, the outcome of which we cannot foresee. Such a confrontation might endanger peace.





The President said he had never underestimated the power of the USSR and he knew Mr. Khrushchev also realized that the US was a strong country. Both have vast supplies of destructive weapons. In the past, it was possible to fight wars without necessarily causing a lasting effect, but the effects of a modern war would go from generation to generation. Therefore, the President continued, both he and the Chairman have the special obligation of carrying out their responsibilities toward their peoples and their national interests in a way not endangering all. In other words, there should be a basic understanding of basic and secondary questions. For instance, Germany and its future is extremely important because of its geographic location. Each side should recognize the interests and responsibilities of the other side.

The President expressed the hope that he would not leave this meeting in Vienna, a city that is symbolic of the possibility of finding equitable solutions, with a problem involving national security and reputation. Although in other days people with similar responsibilities failed, the President said, he hoped that he and the Chairman would be able to succeed. This goal can be achieved only if each is wise and stays in his own area. The President concluded by recalling that last night he had asked Mr. Khrushchev what position he had occupied at the age of 44. The Chairman had replied that he was head of the Moscow Planning Commission and was looking forward to becoming Chairman. As far as he was concerned, the President said, he hoped to become at the age of 67 head of the Boston Planning Commission and perhaps National Chairman of the Democratic Party. Mr. Khrushchev interjected that perhaps the President would like to become head of the Planning Commission of the whole world. The President said no, only of the city of Boston.

[Here follows the same list of participants as printed at the end of Document 84.]



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, Presidentʼs Office Files, USSR. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved by the White House on June 23. The meeting was held at the Soviet Embassy.

2 For text of the Presidentʼs special message to Congress on the defense budget, March 28, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 229-240.

3 Franz Joseph Strauss, West German Defense Minister.





89. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Vienna, June 4, 1961, 3:15 p.m.

SUBJECT

Vienna Meeting Between The President and Chairman Khrushchev



PARTICIPANTS

The President

D—Mr. Akalovsky (interpreting)

Chairman Khrushchev

Mr. Sukhodrev, Interpreter,USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs



After lunch, the President said he wanted to have a few words with the Chairman in private.

The President opened the conversation by saying that he recognized the importance of Berlin and that he hoped that in the interests of the relations between our two countries, which he wanted to improve, Mr. Khrushchev would not present him with a situation so deeply involving our national interest. Of course, he recognized that the decision on East Germany, as far as the USSR was concerned, was with the Chairman. The President continued by saying that evolution is taking place in many areas of the world and no one can predict which course it would take. Therefore, it is most important that decisions be carefully considered. Obviously the Chairman will make his judgment in the light of what he understands to be the best interests of his country. However, the President said, he did want to stress the difference between a peace treaty and the rights of access to Berlin. He reiterated his hope that the relations between the two countries would develop in a way that would avoid direct contact or confrontation between them.

Mr. Khrushchev said he appreciated the frankness of the Presidentʼs remarks but said that if the President insisted on US rights after the signing of a peace treaty and that if the borders of the GDR—land, air, or sea borders—were violated, they would be defended. The US position is not based on juridical grounds. The US wants to humiliate the USSR and this cannot be accepted. He said that he would not shirk his responsibility and would take any action that he is duty bound to take as Prime Minister. He would be glad if the US were to agree to an interim agreement on Germany and Berlin with a time limit so that the prestige and the interests of the two countries would not be involved or prejudiced. However, he said, he must warn the President that if he envisages any action that might bring about unhappy consequences, force would be met by force. The US should prepare itself for that and the Soviet Union will do the same.

The President inquired whether under an interim arrangement forces in Berlin would remain and access would be free. Mr. Khrushchev replied that would be so for six months. In reply to the Presidentʼs query whether the forces would then have to be withdrawn, the Chairman replied in the affirmative.

The President then said that either Mr. Khrushchev did not believe that the US was serious or the situation in that area was so unsatisfactory to the Soviet Union that it had to take this drastic action. The President referred to his forthcoming meeting with Macmillan and said the latter would ask what had happened. The President said that he would have to say that he had gained the impression that the USSR was presenting him with the alternative of accepting the Soviet act on Berlin or having a face to face confrontation. He had come here to prevent a confrontation between our two countries and he regretted to leave Vienna with this impression.

Mr. Khrushchev replied that in order to save prestige we could agree that token contingents of troops, including Soviet troops, could be maintained in West Berlin. However, this would be not on the basis of some occupation rights, but on the basis of an agreement registered with the UN. Of course, access would be subject to GDRʼs control because this is its prerogative. Mr. Khrushchev continued by saying that he wanted peace and that if the US wanted war, that was its problem. It is not the USSR that threatens with war, it is the US.

The President stressed that it was the Chairman, not he, who wanted to force a change.

Mr. Khrushchev replied that a peace treaty would not involve any change in boundaries. In any event, the USSR will have no choice other than to accept the challenge; it must respond and it will respond. The calamities of a war will be shared equally. War will take place only if the US imposes it on theUSSR. It is up to the US to decide whether there will be war or peace. This, he said, can be told Macmillan, De Gaulle and Adenauer. The decision to sign a peace treaty is firm and irrevocable and the Soviet Union will sign it in December if the US refuses an interim agreement.

The President concluded the conversation by observing that it would be a cold winter.



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, Presidentʼs Office Files, USSR. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved by the White House on June 23.





90. Editorial Note


On June 5, 1961, Secretary of State Rusk, who had returned to Paris the previous evening, briefed the North Atlantic Council and President De Gaulle on the meetings in Vienna. At the restricted meeting of the Council at 10:15 a.m. Rusk circulated copies of the two Soviet aides-memoire, reviewed in some detail the progress of the talks, stated that they were not intended to be negotiations but rather a preliminary exchange of observations on U.S.-U.S.S.R. relations, and concluded that they had produced no surprises. (Polto Circular telegram 7, June 5; Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/6-561)

At 3 p.m. the Secretary of State briefed De Gaulle at the Elysee Palace. After brief reviews of the discussion of Laos and disarmament, Rusk went into some detail on the conversations on Berlin, stating that Khrushchev had been “quite firm on all questions dealing with Berlin,” and adding that it seemed to be the main one for the Chairman. The Secretary added that Khrushchev had become quite emotional at some points in the discussion of Germany and seemed “to greatly fear a unified and rebuilt Germany which would be an ally of the West.” When asked why he thought the Chairman wanted to see President Kennedy, Rusk speculated that there was some curiosity on both sides, and that the President wanted to show that the United States was prepared to defend its interest. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 1901)

On June 5 Assistant Secretary of State Kohler went to Bonn to brief Chancellor Adenauer. After an initial report on the Presidentʼs talks in Paris with De Gaulle, Kohler immediately noted that the discussions at Vienna “had scarcely contributed towards détente,” and added that it had been a “hard” meeting. The Assistant Secretary then summarized the talks on Laos and disarmament before concentrating on Berlin. He concluded by stating: “If any conclusion could be drawn … it was the possibility of a developing crisis on Berlin, probably after the Soviet Party Congress in October. This was, however, pure speculation. The tone of the meeting was civil and reasonably courteous, but the substance of what was said was hard on both sides.” (Ibid., Central Files, 611.51/6-561)





While Rusk and Kohler were in Paris and Bonn, the President had flown to London to brief the British. The President explained the Soviet view on Berlin and also gave Prime Minister Macmillan an extensive account of his talks with De Gaulle on the future of Europe. (Notes on a Private Discussion, June 5; ibid., Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 1901) At a second meeting the President and the Prime Minister discussed how to proceed on Berlin. For a record of this conversation, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XIV, pages 98-102.





91. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, June 6, 1961, 4:30 p.m.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION WITH THE PRESIDENT AND THE CONGRESSIONAL LEADERSHIP

PRESENT

The Vice President, Senators Mansfield, Humphrey, Russell, Fulbright, Dirksen, Saltonstall, Hickenlooper, Wiley

The Speaker, Congressmen McCormack, Albert, Vinson, Morgan, Arends, Chiperfield, Hoeven, Byrnes (Wisconsin)



[Here follows discussion of Kennedyʼs meeting with De Gaulle.]

II. Khrushchev

The President reported that the most important subject discussed on the first day had been Laos; that he and Khrushchev had agreed that Laos should be neutral in the same fashion as Cambodia and Burma, but that Khrushchev had not appeared really much interested in Laos. The most ominous discussion of the first day had been Khrushchevʼs doctrine of the three wars. In the Presidentʼs judgment, Khrushchev now feels that there is a balance in the nuclear field which prevents us from using nuclear weapons for local purposes. He feels further that in local engagements the shorter lines of communication and the large manpower of the Sino-Soviet bloc will give it a decisive advantage—whatever number of men we put in, they can put in several times as many. Moreover, Khrushchev insists upon the validity of his third kind of war, namely, the war of liberation, or sacred war. The President reported that in Khrushchevʼs view Iran and South Korea were going to collapse, and his own riposte with respect to Poland. The President believed that this very militant Soviet effort will continue.

Returning to Laos, the President said that there had been some language agreed on in the communiqué,1 and that perhaps something would come from it. He also expressed his view that Khrushchev was partly right in saying that not all weaknesses in governments and danger of Communist take-over could be attributed to the Communists themselves. The President reported that Khrushchev seemed uninterested in Cuba. Khrushchev said that Castro was not a Communist but we were making him one. The President reported Khrushchevʼs view that the present situation was like the period during the decline of feudalism and the rise of capitalism. The President had answered that in that period there had been a lot of wars, and we should try to prevent such a situation now, to which Khrushchev replied that if we want war we can have it. To a question from Senator Fulbright, the President replied that Khrushchev seemed rather bitter on Nasser and that he (the President) had written three letters to Nasser,2 which seemed to produce some improvement in Nasserʼs feeling toward the United States.

Senator Humphrey commented that perhaps we ought not to jump to the conclusion that all people of this sort are going Communist, and referred to the example of Qasim3 in Iraq. The President then read excerpts from the minutes of the conversation after lunch on Saturday, beginning on page 1 and continuing through page 3. (The President specifically omitted reference to his own remarks about the Cuban situation.)

Senator Dirksen asked whether there was discussion of CENTO, and the President said there was not, and repeated his view of the Soviet sense of a change in the power balance. The President then read a passage relating to the Soviet view of the sacred war and how the United States used to be in favor of such revolution but was not any longer.

Asked about the Congo, the President reported Khrushchevʼs statement that his experience in the Congo was what confirmed in him the necessity for the Troika. To a question from Senator Fulbright about arms limitation in Africa, the President replied that the matter had not been discussed. The President read from the memorandum of conversation to explain Mr. Khrushchevʼs remarks about Taiwan.

To a question from Senator Dirksen, the President commented that there had been only a brief reference to U.S. bases.

On Sunday the discussion began with nuclear testing and Mr. Khrushchev had insisted on the Troika, stating that there was no such thing as a neutral person. Control in such circumstances was a form of espionage. There could be no serious control or inspection until after the decision for complete and general disarmament had been accepted. Mr. Khrushchev had urged that the President should agree to a merger of the test talks with disarmament, and the Presidentʼs conclusion was that either from Chinese pressure or for other reasons the Soviets have lost interest in a test ban agreement. The President replied that in his view it would be wrong to merge the test ban with general disarmament since for fifteen years discussion of the latter subject had gotten nowhere. Khrushchev said that when we start to test, he will start to test. The main question now was how to disengage from these negotiations. Macmillan and the President had talked about this matter, which was a hot issue in England. Gaitskell4 had also expressed his hope that we could wait until the autumn, until after his own contest for control in his own party, which he expected to win. This was a problem in Canada, too, and in general a major question of propaganda values. The question was how to break it off so that the Soviets would seem to be responsible.

Discussion then turned to Germany, which was what, in the Presidentʼs judgment, Khrushchev had come to talk about. He gave us an aide-memoire on Germany5 and it was on this subject, for the first time, that his voice began to rise. The President read at length from the memorandum of conversation to show Khrushchevʼs position on Germany and his own response. Senator Fulbright asked whether there was a time limit on these discussions, and the President replied, “He said December.” Then he read further from a memorandum of conversation and particularly emphasized this sentence of Khrushchevʼs: “TheUSSR would never under any conditions accept U.S. rights in Berlin after a peace treaty had been signed.” Senator Dirksen asked three questions: (1) What is Khrushchevʼs physical condition? The President said it was good. (2) Was there any other arrogance about him? The President said no. (3) Should we expect a recognition of East Germany before December? The President said that in his view there might well be a signing of a peace treaty at some such time, and that the Soviets would say that all rights reverted to the East Germans, although they might in fact not do anything to interfere with our access (which the President noted was Prime Minister Macmillanʼs belief). And as far as military access was concerned, our own troops could be supplied with four air sorties a day. To the question whether Khrushchev had described the period of time for which the Free City would have the rights he offered, the President said that the answer was not clear.

The President then quoted again from the aide-memoire to explain the Soviet proposal on a Free City, and also the Soviet view that a peace treaty would formally end occupation rights.

Senator Humphrey asked whether East Berlin had been mentioned. The President answered no.

Senator Humphrey commented further that the Soviet position seemed identical with what Khrushchev stated before, and the President commented that the only new point was the time limit. Senator Humphrey rejoined that even the time limit was not new, in the sense that there had been time limits before. The President stated that in his judgment Khrushchev was talking in cold terms of a genuinely vital present interest.

Senator Saltonstall asked whether Khrushchev seemed moved by fear of West Germany. The President answered that this was what Khrushchev said, but really he was interested in the build-up of East Germany.

In response to a question, the President said that Khrushchev claimed his relations with China were very good.

Senator Dirksen found four propositions in this report: (1) two Germanys, (2) Berlin in the middle of one of them, (3) concessions on troops and access, (4) in the future, when the sovereign power says that you have to take your troops home, you are sunk.

The President said that in his own speech that evening6 he would say the situation was serious, but not press it home too sharply. We shall soon send back an aide-memoire on our own rights,7 and we must consider what else we can do.

Senator Russell said that at present he would be against an airlift. The President replied that we can decide when the time comes. The President further reported that after lunch on Sunday, he had come back to speak to Khrushchev again because he thought he ought to know that this matter of rights of access was a most vital matter to the U.S. The President said that he thought Khrushchev would indeed probably sign a Peace Treaty, and we would then say simply we do not accept it.

Senator Saltonstall asked whether Macmillan and the British were as strong as De Gaulle on this question. The President answered that the British were not as precise. Macmillan was ready to meet his commitments, but De Gaulle seemed harder—ready for war if necessary.

Senator Russell asked how long we have to decide. The President said we would answer the aide-memoire which had much superficial attractiveness. We must get our own position clear on the rights of the people of West Berlin to be free. Then he thought the matter would go along until after the German elections.

Senator Saltonstall asked if Khrushchev seemed confident. The President answered that he thought Khrushchev probably had a knife in himself a little on this one. Not all the advantages are on his side. He will have to initiate the blockade, and it will not be easy for him to give the appearance of right on his side.

Senator Dirksen asked if the Germans were all out of Austria now. The President said yes.

Senator Humphrey said that the danger in a peace treaty is that Khrushchev can disclaim responsibility so that in the event of an incident—if, for example, we should have to shoot down Germans—he would be peacefully out of it, and we would be appearing to start warlike action.

The President said we should continue to hold the Russians responsible. We have to show them that there is a very serious chance that this could lead to war.

Senator Dirksen said that this was the one place where Lucius Clay8 fumbled—we had no easement—we had to go to an airlift. There followed some discussion of how a country lawyer would handle the matter.

The President asked Senator Russell what the U.S. should do if after a peace treaty the East Germans should deny access. Senator Russell said this was a big decision. He believed that if we are firm, it would not come to that point. He asked whether a Free City could be absolutely free and independent of the GDR.

Senator Dirksen asked what the timetable was. The President said we ought not to indicate. Senator Dirksen said the leadership ought to have time to puzzle over it a couple of weeks and then give its views to the President. The President said this was all right, since all we needed now was to send back an aide-memoire stating our own position.

The Vice President asked if it was not fair to state that Khrushchevʼs position as stated to the President was as it has always been, while the President in turn had restated our position.

Congressman McCormack asked for the Presidentʼs basic impression of the man Khrushchev. The President replied that he was very tough. The President had read all of his conversations with President Eisenhower and felt that Khrushchev then, and now, was a persistent counter-puncher. He had not been disagreeable. He came to talk on Germany. He wanted “to know whether we would fight” and that was why the President went back after lunch to make our position very plain. Then Khrushchev had said that if there was to be war, then let it come now, and the President “gave him a box of Sandwich glass and left.” The President felt it was going to be very close, and awfully tough. The Soviets feel that our edge is gone on the nuclear side.

On Laos, the President had asked Khrushchev how we could talk on any matter if we could not agree on Laos.

The President said that in his speech he would give no sense of a time limit, that what he would try to communicate was how the Soviets were planning to operate with patience from their inside lines, hoping to pick up countries which would tumble from interior weakness. In this situation, SEATO and CENTO were not worth a damn, and we must face a different problem.

The President discussed privately with Senator Fulbright a call to the UAR Ambassador.

Senator Dirksen asked about public comment. After some discussion, there seemed to be agreement with the Speakerʼs view that all concerned would simply say that the President had given a preview of what he was going to say that evening. The Vice President summarized his sense of the Vienna meeting by saying that “he expressed his view and we re-expressed ours.” The President agreed, and there was further agreement that we should say nothing that would seem to put Khrushchev in a corner where he must fight back.

Senator Humphrey suggested that the President might presently stress the notion of reunification of Germany—our strong point in the argument.



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, France. The source text bears no classification or drafting information. Printed in part in Declassified Documents, 1986, 2256.

1 For text of the joint communiqué, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, p. 574.

2 Gamal Abdel Nasser, President of the United Arab Republic. Copies of the letters are in Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204, UAR.

3 Abdul Karim Kassim, Premier of Iraq.

4 Hugh T.M. Gaitskell, Leader of the British Labour Party.

5 For text of the aide-memoire on Germany, see Department of State Bulletin, August 7, 1961, pp. 231-233.

6 For text of the Presidentʼs radio and television report to the American people on his trip to Europe, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 441-446.

7 For text of the U.S. reply, July 17, see Documents on Germany, 1944-1985, pp. 753-760.

8 General Lucius D. Clay, U.S. Military Governor for Germany during the Berlin blockade, 1948-1949.





92. Record of Meeting of the Policy Planning CouncilSource


Washington, June 7, 1961, 3 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

George McGhee

John Curtis

Leon Fuller

Robert Packard

Henry Ramsey

Ambassador Bohlen

Edward Rice

Carlton Savage

William Webb

Howard Wriggins



Mr. McGhee asked Mr. Bohlen to give the Council a brief account of the Presidentʼs recent trip to Europe.

Mr. Bohlen began by stating that President Kennedy had made a great impression on De Gaulle, his understanding of French problems, and that the President had stood up to De Gaulle “full face”. He mentioned that about all that was really accomplished, however, was a decision to work out a mechanism for consultation.

Mr. Bohlen gave a brief account of the proceedings of the talks in Vienna. (This account followed the lines of information presented in the Secretaryʼs cables on the meeting.) He discussed the details of the Soviet aide-memoire on Berlin and said that nothing had really been gained or lost on the problem of Berlin. He mentioned that Khrushchev was willing to hold the Vienna meeting because he wanted to get across the contents of the aide-memoire and to inform us that his policy had not changed with regard to the Troika inspection formula. He said that the meeting had gone off rather much as expected and that it was worthwhile from the standpoint that (1) it had solidified positions that needed to be solidified; (2) Adenauer had been very pleased at our standing up to Khrushchev; (3) Kennedy had made a great hit among the Europeans; and (4) Khrushchev had, undoubtedly, been impressed with President Kennedyʼs popularity. He said that he also thought that Khrushchev had been impressed with President Kennedyʼs general ability.

Mr. McGhee asked Mr. Bohlen whether President Kennedy had discussed the Washington-Moscow direct telephone link with Khrushchev, to which Bohlen replied in the negative.

Mr. Bohlen went on to say that the Russian position on Berlin was essentially a very weak one and that he thought that S/P should submit a proposal for handing over the Berlin question to the ICJ to test whether a war-time power could unilaterally hand over its treaty responsibilities to a non-participant. He mentioned that considering Khrushchevʼs various deviations from his firm statement in 1958 on the Berlin situation2 it was difficult to tell whether he was now bluffing or how, but that if the Russians set a time limit at the Party Congress in October on settlement of the Berlin question, this would be a sign that they were not bluffing.

Mr. Bohlen said that there was no hint of a USSR-Chinese schism at the meeting. He said that nothing had been mentioned about another meeting. He ended by saying that on the whole this meeting had a great psychological impact and benefit in Europe.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Curtis.

2 Presumably Bohlen is referring to Khrushchevʼs interview in Pravda, February 8, 1958.





93. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic and Consular PostsSource


Washington, June 8, 1961, 2:32 p.m.

1972. In discussing Kennedy-Khrushchev meeting with local officials and diplomatic colleagues, US officials should draw on Presidentʼs radio and TV address June 6, stressing particularly following points:

Presidentʼs Assessment of Meeting

Talks somber but useful. No advantage or concession gained or given. No major decisions taken. Views two leaders contrasted sharply. However, channels of communication between governments opened more fully. Chances of dangerous misjudgment on either side should now be less.

Future US-Soviet Contacts

a. Joint communiqué June 4 noted agreement “maintain contact on all questions of interest to two countries and for whole world.”

b. Khrushchev did not, however, extend formal invitation to President to visit USSR. While he did say President “would be very welcome” to come to Moscow he did not place invitation in time context. USG, therefore, does not regard this as invitation and no plans exist for such visit.

c. US expects contacts will continue through normal diplomatic channels, including, from time to time, Rusk-Gromyko meetings like that of March 18,1 but two parties did not attempt schedule specific future meetings.



Germany-Berlin

Both sides restated their positions on Germany and Berlin, without narrowing differences. In particular, President made clear US determination uphold all Western rights, including that of access, in Berlin. President emphasized rights Western powers in Berlin not exercised on sufferance USSR and could not be terminated unilaterally. Interference with access would be belligerent act. Security Western Europe and of US deeply involved.

Geneva Test-Ban Negotiations and Disarmament

Hopes for end to nuclear testing, spreading of nuclear weapons, and slowing down arms race “struck a serious blow” by Vienna discussions. Although President strongly pressed case for concluding nuclear test ban treaty both for its own sake and as important contribution to future progress in broader areas of disarmament, Khrushchev made it clear present test-ban talks appeared futile and showed no interest in responding to initiatives taken by US since these talks resumed in March.

Khrushchev indicated Soviet “three-headed monster” concept basic element of Soviet policy. This raises fundamental questions as to feasibility reliable control measures in disarmament field, whether test ban or general disarmament. From discussions evident secrecy continues to be of strategic importance to Soviets. Khrushchev made it clear that until there is sweeping general disarmament, he regards our insistence on far-reaching control provisions pretext for espionage.

President did not encourage Soviet suggestion that testing problem be merged with general disarmament negotiations due begin July.

Laos

Soviets concurred in joint communiqué reaffirming two partiesʼ support “of neutral and independent Laos under Government chosen by Laotians themselves, and of international agreements for insuring that neutrality and independence,” and reluctantly agreed to recognize “importance of effective cease-fire.” While these statements commit Soviets publicly, they do not guarantee change in Soviet policy or mean Soviet influence will be used energetically with Pathet Lao to bring about genuine cease-fire. US watching Soviet and Pathet Lao actions closely and will shape policy and actions in light actual conduct Soviets and Communist forces Laos.

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/6-861. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Davies et al.; cleared withP, AF,SOV, and S; and approved by Kohler. Not sent to Libreville.

1 See Document 47.





94. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk and the Director of the U.S. Information Agency (Murrow) to President KennedySource


Washington, June 8, 1961.

SUBJECT

An Effective Countertheme to “Peaceful Coexistence”



In the period since early 1956 the Soviets have transformed the concept and phrase, “peaceful coexistence,” into a useful political tool by assiduous and continuous propagation at all levels of the government and party apparatus. They have gained abroad a substantial measure of acceptance of this concept as a legitimate objective, not only of their foreign policy but of other countries. It appears as such in repeated joint communiqués of the Soviet Union and other countries and all too frequently in the speeches and conversations of leading political figures, particularly but not exclusively, from the uncommitted countries.

We have attempted to combat it by pointing out both the hypocrisy and true meaning of its major tenets and by indicating that it is nothing more than a Soviet rationalization for using every measure of struggle against the free world except nuclear warfare. Toward this end we have made occasional public speeches and have instructed our posts abroad to disseminate our views of it. This has been manifestly inadequate. In the field of propaganda one simply can not beat something with nothing.

We have needed a single, simple countertheme if we are to do the job. After a long study of the possible alternatives, we have concluded that “peaceful world community” is the most effective phrase we can find. Although this phrase seems to embody the essence of our basic foreign objectives, we recognize that neither it nor any other single phrase will magically accomplish our purposes. If, however, we devote the same degree of attention and effort to it that the Soviets give to “peaceful coexistence,” we should be able to invest it with meaningful content, achieve an increasing measure of understanding of the difference between our and the Soviet concept and have some success in associating other countries with our view. “Peaceful world community” also helps us in our efforts to emphasize that “general and complete disarmament” is not an end in itself but an important component of a larger aim. John McCloy quite independently used the exact phrase for that purpose in his conversation with Gromyko.1 USIA is instructing all its media to employ the term whenever it is appropriate.

If you approve of this phrase and of its employment in the manner indicated, we will give some thought as to how it can be most auspiciously launched.

Dean Rusk

Edward R. Murrow2





* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 761.00/6-861. Official Use Only. Drafted by Armitage.

1 Not further identified.

2 Printed from a copy that bears Ruskʼs stamped signature and Murrowʼs typed signature with an indication that both signed the original memorandum.





95. Paper Prepared in the Department of StateSource


Washington, June 12, 1961.

TALKING POINTS REVIEWING CONVERSATIONS BETWEEN PRESIDENT KENNEDY AND CHAIRMAN KHRUSHCHEV (June 3-4, 1961)

Overall U.S.-Soviet Relations

1. President began talks with expression of hope conversations would be useful and provide better understanding of problems confronting the two countries.

2. President said common objective should be to conduct competition of two systems without endangering peace. Problem is to find means of avoiding situations in which two countries become committed to actions involving their security. President stressed this point repeatedly.

3. Khrushchev stated desire for improved relations but not at expense other people. Referred to lack of direct conflict in economic field. Stressed need for solution basic questions, failing which tensions would continue: West must recognize de facto that Communism exists and has won right to develop. In luncheon toast Khrushchev decried idea of mutual concessions in negotiation, asking what could he concede and saying concession of even a portion of peace would mean no peace at all.

4. Khrushchev expounded on eventual Communist triumph through spread of ideas; claimed challenge lay in force economic example and in political arena; gave “guarantee” USSR would not try to propagate ideas by use of nuclear missiles; denied intent to use force of arms or impose its system on others.

5. President said USSR seeks to eliminate free system while objecting to any efforts of others to eliminate Communist system in the bloc. Rejected idea of historical inevitability of Communist triumph, defended the right of free popular choice.

6. Khrushchev tried to interpret the Presidentʼs position as an effort to justify resort to arms to oppose the spread of Communist ideas.



“Miscalculation”

1. President outlined mutual danger of miscalculation. Cited historical examples and emphasized importance of considering views and positions of other side before embarking on a course of action.

2. Khrushchev said miscalculation is vague term, Soviets can not guarantee Communist ideas wonʼt spread. Term can be applied to both sides. USSR will defend its vital interests, can not be intimidated. USSR appreciates loss to both sides which war would bring but use of term “miscalculation” does not affect the USSR.



China

1. Khrushchev brought up China but stated he was not authorized to speak for the Chinese Communists. Urged the President to adopt a “reasonable” course by recognizing the Chinese Communists. Termed Chinese Communistsʼ exclusion from the UN “unrealistic” but said Chinese Communists would never join the UN if the Chinese Nationalists were still there.

2. He termed present U.S. policy toward Chinese Communists unreasonable and said it might ultimately lead to war. Urged the U.S. to settle its problems with the Chinese Communists and end the “occupation” of Taiwan.

3. Khrushchev probed for possible changes in U.S.-China policy but President left him under no illusions that change could be expected. The President cited the constant hostility of the Chinese Communists towards the U.S. and acknowledged U.S. relations with Chinese Communists were indeed bad. He stressed that U.S. strategic interests were involved in the U.S. position on Taiwan and said that he considered the security of the U.S. involved as well.



Underdeveloped and Uncommitted Areas

1. Khrushchev denied responsibility for popular uprisings against “tyrannical regimes” and charged U.S. supported military dictators and opposed social change. Cited Cuba, Iran, Pakistan, South Korea, Turkey, Spain, Angola. He said USSR supports the aspirations of the people.

2. Khrushchev referred to Cuba, said Castro is not a Communist but U.S. policy could make him one. Termed Presidentʼs statement that U.S. security threatened dangerous. If U.S. free to act in Cuba, what of Turkey and Iran; miscalculation possible in such situation.

3. President explained U.S. attitude toward Cuba, stressing Castroʼs destruction of right of free choice and his stated intent to use Cuba as base for expansion in neighboring area.

4. President asked Soviet attitude should West-oriented government be installed in Poland, said social and political changes in the world should take place in ways not involving national security, treaty commitments or prestige of two countries.

5. Khrushchev said Castro would be removed as Batista was if he failed to give the Cubans freedom. Our countries should not intervene. Added that under influence of Soviet aid Castro might turn Communist but Khrushchev could not now see which way Castro would go.

6. President sketched three U.S. interests: free choice through elections for all people; defense of our strategic interests (Spain, Yugoslavia); events in next decade not greatly disturbing the balance of power (referred to effect of Chinese Communist development of military potential).



Colonialism

1. President expressed support for liberation movement in Africa, noted we had rankled allies to sustain this position.

2. Khrushchev replied U.S. position is basically anti-liberation, pro-allies.

3. President referred to Khrushchevʼs January speech and support of wars of national liberation. Stated that problem was how to avoid direct contact between two countries as we support respective groups; referred to Viet-Nam guerrilla activity and said we do not believe they represent popular will.

4. Khrushchev said peopleʼs only recourse often to arms, cited Algeria and Angola. Called them “sacred” wars. Affirmed Soviet support but tried to deny direct Soviet participation.

5. President said we were concerned also with what followed nation-hood in such areas. Balance of power could be disturbed if they associated closely with USSR.

6. Khrushchev charged this meant U.S. could not recognize neutrality unless it followed U.S., said that if some African country went Communist this would be expression of popular will and our interference could set off chain reaction and lead to war.

7. President said situation in Burma, India and Yugoslavia satisfactory to us.

8. President referred again to Poland to illustrate problem of close association of neighboring country with antagonistic power. Mentioned the question of popular support and this led to pointed exchange with Khrushchev on question of popularity of Polish Government.



Laos

1. Khrushchev said both sides supplying arms in Laos. Side USSR supporting has popular support and would win out, like Mao vs. Chiang in China.

2. Both agreed Laos not strategically very important, but President noted our treaty commitments in the area and with reference to Laos.

3. Khrushchev took exception to reference to commitments, said U.S. could not assert special rights and dispense indulgences, as forces in world now in balance.

4. President noted U.S. and USSR had expressed desire for neutral and independent Laos, referred to Cambodia and Burma to illustrate meaning of those terms. Khrushchev assented.

5. President emphasized primary need for effective verification of cease-fire, citing reports of violation and need for new instructions toICC.

6. Khrushchev digressed on anti-popular regimes again and said U.S. talks too much of anti-guerrilla warfare and such talk dangerous. Said guerrilla success dependent on local support, could not be gained from outside the country. Interference from outside could bring war and terrible prospect of mutual destruction.

7. Khrushchev said USSR would not agree to ICC becoming a kind of supra-government; three sides must agree among themselves regarding a cease-fire and U.S. and USSR could use influence to bring agreement about. Gromyko added ICC could act by agreement of Laotian parties. Khrushchev said basic question of formation of Laotian government should not be contingent on a cease-fire.

8. Khrushchev alleged and President denied U.S. had ordered and then recalled order for a Marine landing in Laos.

9. President stressed need of avoiding a situation which could lead to retaliation and counter-retaliation and thus endanger peace.



Nuclear Testing

1. Khrushchev said two basic questions were: (1) number of suspicious events to be inspected and (2) organization of control.

2. Since events in the Congo the Soviet Union cannot accept proposed controls. Single administrator could set policy and Soviet Union could not accept neutral chairman as no person truly neutral.

3. Khrushchev said three inspections a year sufficient, greater number would be gathering of intelligence.

4. Khrushchev favored linking nuclear test question with disarmament. If disarmament agreement reached, USSR could accept any controls and would then drop Troika proposal and the requirement for unanimity. Two years should be sufficient to develop general and complete disarmament agreement.

5. President said testing treaty along lines Khrushchev proposed would not provide reasonable deterrent against violations and he could not send it to the Senate.

6. Khrushchev said test ban alone not important to national security if weapons production continued.

7. President stressed effect on proliferation of nuclear weapons and Khrushchev said this was whyUSSR had entered negotiations.

8. Khrushchev said in absence of link between test ban and disarmament other countries may say they are in unequal position and test weapons like France is doing.

9. President stressed treaty provisions for abrogation if other parties tested and noted relevant ease of controls on testing because they are based on scientific instrumentation.

10. (Gromyko defended the Soviet proposals for a tripartite administrator at great length in separate conversations with the Secretary.)

11. President said test ban would at least be very significant step and would facilitate disarmament agreement.

12. President said prospect of indefinite continuance of uncontrolled moratorium is a matter of great concern to U.S. Difficult to see how test ban could be included in disarmament negotiations which will probably require a long time. Perhaps we should make another effort at Geneva or recess the conference.

13. The President stated we would begin bilateral discussions on June 19 whether or not there was an agreement on nuclear testing. Khrushchev agreed to continued Geneva negotiations but reiterated USSR could not accept controls tantamount to espionage if weapons themselves were not eliminated.

14. In response to Khrushchevʼs question, President said he would not agree to tie test ban question to disarmament unless there was assurance disarmament agreement could be reached speedily. He said espionage problem insignificant in comparison with consequences of development of nuclear capability by other countries.



Disarmament

1. In response to Presidentʼs question, Khrushchev said Soviet disarmament proposals provided for proceeding by stages and for control in each stage.

2. President inquired whether if general and complete disarmament accepted as a commitment of national policy and a nuclear test ban was included in the first stage would test ban be subject to inspection without veto.

3. Khrushchev replied that he would try to persuade President not to start with test ban as it not the most important measure. He said any measures, such as prohibition nuclear weapons, prohibition of manufacture of such weapons or elimination of military or missile bases, could come first.

4. In separate luncheon conversation Khrushchev said cooperation in outer space projects would be impossible without disarmament.



Germany and Berlin

1. Khrushchev attacked German militarism and said no delay in signature of a peace treaty was justifiable.USSR wanted agreement with U.S. but in its absence would sign a separate peace treaty with GDR, the state of war would cease and all commitments, including rights, institutions and allied access would become invalid. U.S. troops could stay in Berlin under certain conditions; Soviet troops should also be there and neutral troops under UN guarantee would be acceptable.

2. The President contrasted Berlin with Laos. He said we fought to get to Berlin. Our national security is affected by what happens there, and we have contractual rights to which every President involved has reaffirmed his obligations. If we allowed ourselves to be expelled from Berlin no one could have confidence in our commitments and this deeply involves our national security. He, no more than Khrushchev, is prepared to preside over isolation of his own country.

3. President rejected Khrushchevʼs charge that reference to national security signified U.S. wanted to improve its position. The U.S. was not pushing but was interested in maintaining position in and access to Berlin. Situation might be unsatisfactory but situations elsewhere unsatisfactory and this not the right time to change Berlin situation. Neither U.S. nor USSR could accept the change in balance of power that would result from Soviet proposal.

4. Khrushchev defended peace treaty as restraint on German revanchists. Said no force could prevent USSR signing treaty. GDR sovereignty would then be established and its violation regarded by USSR as open aggression.

5. In reply to Presidentʼs question, Khrushchev specifically said allied access to Berlin would be blocked by peace treaty. President reiterated that our views and interests should be carefully considered and said Khrushchev had laid down a most serious challenge with unforeseeable consequences. Expressed hope Khrushchev would consider both his and Presidentʼs responsibilities toward their own countries.

6. Khrushchev maintained USSR wished only to formalize existing situation and gain recognition as a fait accompli of the existence of theGDR socialist state. Continuance of U.S. occupation rights after a peace treaty was impossible to imagine.

7. President said Soviet Union cannot give U.S. rights to the GDR.

8. Khrushchev said USSR prepared to accept interim agreement not involving prestige of two countries right now. Agreement could set six months time limit for Germans to solve question of reunification. Then U.S. and USSR could disavow responsibilities and anyone would be free to conclude a peace treaty. He expressed confidence that our people would not start cutting each otherʼs throats for ideological reasons. Said USSR can delay no longer, will probably sign peace treaty at the end of the year. He later specifically referred to December.

9. Later Khrushchev said that USSR would be defending peace if the U.S. started a war in Berlin. U.S. should avoid miscalculation, but if U.S. wants war over Germany let it be so. He was confident common sense would gain the upper hand and peace prevail.

10. The President denied any wish to precipitate a crisis but stressed our profound commitment in Berlin. It is strategically important that the world believes the U.S. a serious country whose commitments one could rely on. Said signing of a peace treaty not a belligerent act but denial of our contractual rights would be.

11. Khrushchev said USSR would not accept U.S. rights in Berlin after a peace treaty and was convinced the world would understand the Soviet position.

12. The President said our position in West Berlin was strongly supported by the people there. President is prepared to discuss any problem between us but we should take carefully into account each otherʼs views and interests. He did not assume office to accept arrangements totally inimical to U.S. interests.

13. Referring to an interim agreement Khrushchev said it would be a formal factor giving the semblance of turning the problem over to the Germans. He referred to the aide-memoire (later handed to U.S. officials) and concluded U.S. could study it and perhaps return to the question later if it wished.1





* * *



* Source: Yale University, Bowles Papers, Box 300, Folder 535. Secret. The source text bears no drafting or clearance information, but according to another copy it was drafted by Armitage and cleared by Bohlen and Kohler. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/6-1261) The Department of State prepared this paper in response to a request by Bundy for a talking point paper to debrief the National Security Council on the Vienna talks. (Memorandum, June 10; ibid., 611.61/6-1061)

1 At its meeting on June 13 the National Security Council discussed Berlin based on this paper. Although no NSC record of the meeting has been found, General Lemnitzerʼs handwritten notes on the meeting read as follows:

“Vienna—

“Difficult time in store on Berlin.

“Sec State—reviewed pol. situation. 1st step—answer aide-memoire, timing is rather vague. cannot abandon. Western position is difficult.

“Pres—status of supplies. Sec reviewed. civil defense? reorg on CD—costs, $300m. $50m to be used for shelters. $100m for new buildings.

“Pres—We must get in touch with every American—he must be resp—what can he do—etc.” (National Defense University, Lemnitzer Papers, Box 29, L-215-71)





96. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, June 15, 1961.

Nuclear Test Talks

Soviet delegate Tsarapkin at the Geneva test talks has dropped all pretense of serious interest in concluding an agreement and is seeking to induce the US and Britain to take the initiative in terminating the negotiations. He charged on 12 June that the West now is interested only in ending the talks and placing the blame on the USSR.

At the same session Tsarapkin formally introduced the Soviet aide-memoire of 4 June on nuclear testing which was handed to the US at the conclusion of the Presidentʼs talks with Khrushchev in Vienna.1 This memorandum proposed that, in view of the failure to reach an agreement on a test ban, the powers take up the “cardinal question” of general and complete disarmament and settle the disarmament and nuclear test problems interdependently.

The Soviet memorandum stated that the USSR would agree to sign a general disarmament treaty including Western proposals on the cessation of nuclear testing and implied that a test ban could be part of the first stage of such a treaty. Tsarapkin contended that these proposals demonstrated the USSRʼs flexibility and “constructive approach” and denied any intention of issuing an ultimatum. He stressed, however, that the West has the choice of either signing a test ban treaty on Soviet terms or merging these talks with negotiations on general disarmament.

The Soviet proposal is clearly aimed at prolonging the present uncontrolled moratorium on testing. Moscow probably also calculates that the opening of bilateral Soviet-US disarmament talks on 19 June and the international conference on general disarmament scheduled to begin on 31 July in Geneva will act as a brake on any US move to resume nuclear weapons tests this summer.

The Soviet move to terminate separate negotiations on the nuclear test issue by submerging them in the complex subject of general disarmament probably springs from two main considerations. Now that Khrushchev has restored top-level contact with the US by his meeting with the President, which he believes will open the way for negotiations on the key political issues of Berlin and Germany, he has no further interest in keeping the test talks alive as a means of promoting an accommodation with Washington.

Another and probably more important motivating factor is Communist Chinaʼs long-standing opposition to a test ban without the complete destruction of all existing nuclear weapon stockpiles—a condition which Peiping insists on in order to preclude a test ban agreement. [Here follows further discussion of the nuclear test talks.]



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Secret; Noforn. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. Concurred in by CIAʼs Office of Scientific Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 7-8 of the Weekly Review section of the issue.

1 For text, see Documents on Disarmament, 1961, pp. 162-166.





97. Editorial Note


On June 19, 1961, Admiral Burke, Chief of Naval Operations, forwarded to Secretary of State Rusk a memorandum of the same date to the Joint Chiefs of Staff in which he argued that Chairman Khrushchev may have “deliberately raised the alarm on Berlin in order to seek concessions elsewhere. One of the most dangerous areas for seeking such a concession would be Southeast Asia. He may envision a relaxation of the Berlin crisis in exchange for an understanding that the U.S. would not forcefully resist further Communist expansion in Southeast Asia.” For text of Burkeʼs memorandum, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XIV, pages 129-130.





98. Paper Prepared in the Department of StateSource


Washington, undated.

US ECONOMIC RELATIONS WITH THE SOVIET BLOC

I. Summary

Statement of the Problem

Can US economic policy with respect to the USSR and the dominated countries of Eastern Europe be modified to serve US interests more effectively? If so, what modifications are desirable and how, when and under what circumstances should they be accomplished? Particular attention should be given to the specific trade controls which might be useful in bargaining for meaningful concessions from the Soviet Bloc. All of these questions should be considered in the broader context of economic relations with the bloc, including credits, relationships with our allies, and effect upon our objectives in the less-developed countries. The adamant and militantly aggressive policies of Communist China and the dominated areas of Asia toward the US, leave little room for maneuver in the economic field. Consequently, this paper does not deal with that area.

A. The Basic Factors in the Current Situation

1. Economic relations and the conflict of systems.

The US and the Free World have entered a new phase in relations with the Soviet Union and the European satellites, in which economic competition looms large and in which our use of economic tools has broad political and psychological consequences throughout the world, as well as in the Bloc. The new phase in East-West relations requires a new look at the principal factors of the current situation and the net effectiveness of our economic policy toward the Soviet Bloc in support of other elements in our foreign policy.



2. The long-term struggle.

Given the military, political and other elements of Free World strength which limit the likelihood of total war, this new look must be in the perspective of conflict over the long-run. In practical terms this long-term struggle will be waged in the constantly changing perspective of short-run improvements in global influence and power.



3. Superior US and Free World economic strength.

Superior Free World strength is a dominant factor at the present time. In order to secure the future, US and Western economic strength at home and in the international sphere must be used with confidence and with some calculated risk, to meet Soviet moves to undermine our economic and social institutions.



4. Bloc objectives and tactics.

The timely growth of economic power at home and its extension abroad are regarded by the Bloc as major political objectives. The Soviet Union tends to use its economic power as a deliberate instrument of political influence and world leadership. Its persistent and varied attacks on the US are also designed to undermine world confidence in our good faith and economic capabilities. It attempts to weaken ties between the less-developed countries and the rest of the Free World, and to work over the long-run for isolation of the US from its allies. The dominated countries have shared these objectives and tactics under Soviet leadership.

At the same time there are weaknesses in the Soviet approach not only in the spotty development of its economy, but also in terms of strains on relations within the Bloc, and its dependence on Western technology for accelerated advancement of its economic power base.



5. US economic policies.

US economic policies have served broad US interests, but the instruments in the hands of the Executive Branch have lacked the flexibility to serve US interests in specific cases, particularly in dealings with the European satellites. These policies have advocated increased trade in peaceful goods within the limitations of that inflexibility and the practical difficulties of trading with the Bloc. In general, US economic policies toward the Bloc have been policies of denial. Actual trade has been insignificant. (a) Effect on the Bloc. Multilateral controls on critical goods and technology have had some effect in delaying development of certain important areas of the Bloc economic power base. Unilateral US controls (with relatively minor exceptions) have had little direct effect. The denial of US credit and the degree to which industrialized countries have limited credits to the Soviet Bloc, have limited Soviet Bloc imports of capital equipment for economic development.

(b) Effect on the Free World. The principal effect of US restrictions and urging our industrialized allies to adopt them, has been one of resentment. Some of them regard US economic policies toward the Bloc as being unnecessarily defensive and restrictive. Differences of view are an increasing cause of friction, particularly with respect to extension of US controls to American-owned firms in their countries.





Our allies in the less-developed world have generally given tacit support to US policies as an integral part of a common policy of resist-ance to Bloc political and economic incursions.

The effect on uncommitted less-developed countries has been largely psychological in the resentment of US controls which some view as infringements on their sovereignty and in the concern aroused as to the possible contribution of such controls to increased world tension. However, on the material side, some less-developed countries are also concerned about the potential injury to their trade if the US were to increase trade with the Bloc.

B. US Objectives and East-West Economic Policy Changes

1. The basic objective.

The basic objective of US policy and actions in East-West economic relations is to strengthen our posture while using economic relations as tools to cope with growing competition from Soviet Bloc economic power and to contribute to sound relations generally with the Bloc and the Free World. Flexibility is an essential ingredient in the successful application of our economic tools in support of our total foreign policy. Flexibility does not mean mere relaxation of restrictions; it means increasing Executive Branch freedom of maneuver so that we can exploit opportunities in different ways from time to time in furtherance of US and Free World interests. It means a change in policy to one of maneuverability by eliminating the rigidities of some of our present laws and administrative restrictions bearing on East-West economic relations. This flexibility is needed for practical effect in the actual bargaining for meaningful short and long-term concessions from the Bloc.

Our objectives in making most effective use of our economic relations should be: (a) to contribute to the image of US and Free World initiative, confidence, objectivity and integrity;

(b) to reach substantial agreement with our allies on the nature of the Soviet threat, its techniques and the role of Western economic tools in various fields;

(c) to improve the climate for growth of economic and other institutions in less-developed countries, which strengthen their political freedom and foster economic growth; and

(d) to strengthen US presence in selected dominated countries of Eastern Europe and to provide them with an alternative to dependence upon the Soviet Union.





2. Resume of major recommendations. (a) Trade. It is recognized that there is a limited potential for bringing allied practice on East-West economic controls into conformity with US desires. The maximum possible reconciliation of US and allied policies is imperative for the achievement of broader objectives and for increasing the effectiveness of the Western response to the over-all Soviet Bloc threat. The contribution which the changes proposed would make in reconciling differences between US policies and those of our Western allies is an important element in improving the effectiveness of US actions. With flexibility in the hands of the Executive, and substantial agreement with our allies, trade could be used as one tool in the total confrontation. The estimates of increased US trade with the Bloc (given the elimination of most restrictions, except for Government credits) indicate that it would not be significant in relation to the total trade of the Bloc, but would be to their net technological advantage. (1) Export Controls 1. The United Statesʼ embargo list used by the Department of Commerce should be made identical with the international COCOM embargo list. All other goods (except those on the “general license” list) would still be subject to individual export licensing for shipment to the Soviet Bloc with a general rule for approval except in those special cases covering equipment or technology closely related to military items or to the production thereof where denial by the US would effectively prevent Soviet Bloc acquisition from any Free World source of that equipment or technology, or equipment or technology substitutable therefor. For those commodities which do not meet the COCOM strategic criteria but whose export would constitute so significant a contribution to Soviet economic development and to Soviet potential for economic penetration as to be damaging to broad considerations of Western defense planning, the United States might propose that NATO consider such special situations and, if it agrees that multilateral control action is or might be desirable, request COCOM to develop a program for the institution of controls when judged necessary.

2. In discussions of trade with the USSR and the dominated countries of Eastern Europe, the US should be prepared (taking into account the special circumstances involved in the case of each country of the area) to consider the approval of export licenses up to specified annual levels for certain types of goods in which the particular Bloc country is interested. Such commitments could then be included in any agreements which might be concluded with Bloc countries on trade or other economic matters. The US Government would have no obligation to approve exports of items not listed in the agreement or in excess of the quotas, but might do so if it wished.

3. The export of unpublished technical information should be controlled in a manner consistent with export controls over commodities. Thus, if a commodity is permitted to be exported to the Soviet Bloc, the export of the technical information with respect to such commodity should also be permitted to be exported.





(2) Import Restrictions

The Administration should seek an amendment of the Trade Agreements Extension Act of 1951 which would authorize the President to restore MFN treatment to Soviet Bloc countries and to permit the importation of certain furs from the USSR, if the President determines it to be in the national interest to do so.

The Departments of State and Treasury should undertake joint consultation with a view to developing a more realistic and effective method of applying the Antidumping Law in the case of imports from Soviet Bloc countries. It is desirable that a new and more suitable approach be adopted with regard to the administration of the Antidumping Law in the case of imports from Bloc countries lest the administration of the act prevent legitimate imports from Bloc countries and nullify the effect of other recommendations in this paper.



(3) Surplus Agricultural Disposal

The Administration should seek modification of PL 4801 to provide discretionary authority for the President to waive the “friendly nation” requirement of the Act, with respect to the dominated countries of Eastern Europe, when the President considers such action to be in the national interest. Amendment of the Act should also be sought to permit barter of subsidized agricultural commodities to the USSR.



(4) Stockpile Surpluses

The US Government should inform the Soviet Bloc countries, at appropriate occasions, that the United States is prepared to consider bids for stockpile surpluses subject to existing controls on certain strategic materials and continued embargo on goods to the Communist countries of Asia.



(5) Underdeveloped Countries

The Administration should seek legislation which would authorize the President to reduce US tariffs or other import restrictions in order to provide alternative opportunities for exports of a Free World country under Communist economic pressure.

Implementation of the recommendations for increasing trade with the Soviet Bloc should give careful consideration to the effect on the less-developed countries, including those whose products might be affected, as well as those who have stood by us in the period of stronger controls and who would look askance at the calculated easing of such controls. We should make clear to the less-developed countries that our extension of credits to certain of the dominated countries of the Soviet Bloc is in the common interest and that we intend to maintain the planned general level of assistance to our friends.



(6) NATO

The United States should support a NATO study of economic relations with the Soviet Bloc and the implications thereof to the Free World, in order that a coordinated program may be developed to protect the interests of the Free World. Special problems posed by Soviet Bloc purchase and sales policies in individual commodities should also be examined, and the US should develop specific policies and programs to guide US participation in those studies (e.g., the current oil study).

The United States should seek to extend the concept of contingency planning with our allies to the use of economic levers in conjunction with our diplomatic and other actions in the event of a crisis such as may occur in Berlin and Iran. Initial bilateral consultations with our key allies would prepare for introduction of the subject into NATO. A formula should be developed to bring Japan into these considerations. The United States should also explore in NATO the principle of coordinated action to provide alternative markets to a country subjected to severe Bloc pressure as a result of a sharp reduction in Bloc purchases.



(7) Trade Practices

From time to time the suggestion has been made that it would be desirable to develop general “ground rules” for the conduct of trade and other economic relations between the Soviet Bloc and the Free World.

There are serious problems which Free World countries face in dealing with the Bloc which might be lessened if certain ground rules could be developed. Some of these problems relate to such matters as disruptive pricing practices, resale of primary commodities, inadequate arbitration, patent and copyright procedures, and lack of reasonable access by businessmen.

At the present time the United States Government is seeking to develop a set of ground rules which would provide an effective and realistic basis for governing trade relations between the Soviet Bloc and Free World countries, but has not yet developed such rules. A study of the problem is now underway. When the United States has developed a sufficiently significant number of such rules, it should discuss them bilaterally with certain key countries such as the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy and Japan. If such preliminary soundings warrant proceeding further, they should be discussed in the NATO. Pending the possible adoption of such ground rules, an effort should be made to obtain in such individual understandings or agreements on particular economic problems as may be concluded with the Soviet Bloc such general safeguards or rules as it is possible to devise to ensure fair treatment.





(b) Finance. One of the main concerns of the Soviet Union is its desire for credits to finance its rapid power build-up through technically-advanced imports from the West. At the present time, it receives some European credits repayable over a period of up to five years, and is pressing for an extension of the repayment period on future credits. While the US Government should have flexibility in determining the use of credits for the dominated countries of the Soviet Bloc, at the present time it is not appropriate to consider the extension of government credits to the Soviet Union.

The Administration should seek amendment of the Johnson Act2 so as to authorize the President to waive restrictions of the Act on private credits when he finds such action to be in the national interest.

We should continue to press for an independent lend-lease settlement. The lack of such a settlement should not necessarily preclude possible United States action on MFN, furs, credits, etc., which would promote the expansion of peaceful trade. Action which might be taken on any of these matters should be considered in the light of advantages we might gain in other fields and in the light of other factors affecting US relations with the USSR.

The extension of public credits or government guarantees on private credits to the dominated countries of Eastern Europe should be considered on their merit on an individual, case by case, basis in the light of US policy toward the country concerned. While public credits to the USSR would be proscribed, the extension of export-import guarantees of normal, short, and medium-term credits to the USSR should be permissible on a case by case basis when it is clear that the assistance involved is to American firms seeking to do business with the USSR and does not constitute assistance to the USSR as defined under the Battle Act.

The United States should continue, bilaterally and in NATO, its efforts to persuade our allies, including Japan, of the need to limit medium and long-term credits to the Soviet Bloc, and to the USSR in particular, bearing in mind the limited total availabilities of Free World development credits for the less-developed countries.



(c) International Economic Forums. International economic forums constitute an area where the Bloc has been increasingly active, presumably for politico-psychological reasons. Despite their efforts, the Bloc has not achieved any significant results. We should make clear our willingness to meet Bloc demands for selected and appropriate representation, when they provide qualified personnel, but resist Bloc pressures for additional key positions or replacement of Western nationals under vicious personal attack from the Soviet Bloc. While we should plan positive initiatives to the extent possible, we should not attempt to counter every Bloc move nor, conversely, fear to take a strongly negative line in opposing Soviet initiatives. The budget for US participation in international forums should be increased to permit more adequate US delegations. The US should actively seek recruitable US and other friendly officials to fill secretariat positions, even to the extent, when necessary, of providing added inducements to attract key personnel.

(d) Civil Aviation. Civil aviation is a major economic element in the day-to-day conflict of systems. Bloc civil air activities assign high priority to the supply of craft, development of airlines, and related facilities as a part of its program of economic penetration and erosion of US and Western strength.

The United States should continue to seek an air transport agreement with theUSSR on the basis of reciprocal rights with appropriate safeguards and emphasis on international standards and principles. The United States should continue to encourage our allies throughout the world to follow the same pattern in insistence upon reciprocity and adherence to international standards.

The United States should also promote assistance to, and participation in, national civil air enterprises in less-developed countries by American enterprises and, where appropriate, to assist in the development of regional airlines.



(e) Aid Projects to Less-Developed Countries. The United States should, in developing its own aid program, take into account Soviet aid programs and their competitive objectives. In some cases it may be advisable to give aid in order to compete with Bloc activities. As a general rule US programs should give maximum weight to sound economic development as a guiding principle. However, the political objectives which are a part of broad US objectives should be weighed into the balance especially when through its aid program the United States can prevent the Soviets from achieving a dominant position in a recipient country; or when the success of US efforts can be jeopardized by Soviet influence in key sectors or with key people in a recipient country.

Under present circumstances, the United States should not in general propose joint sponsorship of aid projects with the Bloc. US aid which may relate to Bloc projects should be considered on a case-by-case basis.



(f) International Commodity Problems. The US should in general favor participation by Bloc countries in international study groups and agreements. However, each situation should be considered on its merits and less formal association on the pattern of the Soviet understanding with the International Tin Council, should also be considered.





3. Implementation and timing of recommendations.

Consultation should be undertaken in the near future with key NATO countries in order to obtain greater harmony of policy on economic relations between the Free World and the Bloc.

At the appropriate time, the Executive Branch should begin consultation with the Congress to obtain support for greater flexibility. The foundation should be laid for early request for Congressional action on the key legislative recommendations mentioned in this paper. The manner of presentation of legislative changes should be determined after consultation with Congressional leaders.

Without requiring Congressional approval, certain actions might be taken, should it be determined that they would contribute to our political objectives in respect of the USSR and the dominated countries of Eastern Europe, taking into account the special circumstances of the individual countries to which the actions could apply. Among such possible actions are the development of more flexible procedures with regard to certain Foreign Assets control regulations, and announcement of US readiness to accept bids from the Soviet Bloc for stockpile purchases.

Following is an appendix3 which provides a more complete discussion of specific policy changes and actions.





* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.614/6-1961. Secret. The source text bears no drafting or clearance information, but is attached to a June 19 memorandum from Ball to Rusk, which states that it had the concurrence of EUR, E,S/P, L,INR, and H. At the Secretaryʼs staff meeting on June 9 Rusk had requested a review of the entire subject of negotiations with the Soviet Union in light of the summit meeting. (Ibid., Secretaryʼs Staff Meetings: Lot 66 D 147) Ballʼs memorandum stated that this paper should be regarded in the light of that request. A cover sheet and table of contents are not printed.

1 For text of the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act, July 10, 1954, see 68 Stat. 454.

2 For text of the Johnson Debt Default Act, April 13, 1934, as amended on July 31, 1945, see 59 Stat. 516.

3 Not found.





99. Memorandum From the Counselor of the Department of State (McGhee) to the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Kohler)Source


Washington, June 21, 1961.

SUBJECT

US-Soviet Direct Telephone



1. This year a Berlin crisis will create heightened tensions and possibly some violence in the heart of Europe. At the height of this crisis, the US and USSR will each be seeking to judge the likelihood of a pre-emptive strike by the opposing side. If either country judges that a strike by the other has become a probability, it may well hit first.

2. It is in the US interest to minimize the risk of such a miscalculation. This purpose might be served by certain consensual arrangements, which might be taken beforehand by the Soviets and ourselves. Secure facilities for direct telephone communication between the heads of the US and Soviet governments would be one such measure. This was proposed to Mr. McCloy by a panel which he assembled under Professor Schelling1 to study the problem of war by miscalculation. Mr. McCloy proposed it to the Secretary, who approved it and suggested to the President that he raise the matter at Vienna. I am told the Presidentʼs failure to do so was due to nothing more than the press of other matters—although you would know more about this than I.

3. I would think it useful to press ahead urgently with this direct telephone facility. If and when violence short of general war occurs over Berlin, the ability of the US and Soviet heads of government to communicate rapidly, surely, and directly may be essential to maintenance of peace.

4. I wonder if it would not be useful for Ambassador Thompson to put this proposal directly to Khrushchev, while we are staffing out in the Department the technical steps that would be necessary to install a direct telephone line between the Department and the Embassy which could be used for conversation between the two heads of government.

If Khrushchev approved the proposal, as his past statements suggest that he would, then some US experts could be despatched to Moscow who have studied the problem of war by miscalculation, such as those who have served on Mr. McCloyʼs panel. These experts could discuss with the Soviets measures that would be needed to make the phone of optimum usefulness.



5. Not the last advantage of raising this matter with the Soviets now would be in indicating to them our expectation that there will be grave risk of a Berlin crisis escalating into general nuclear war, if they precipitate such a crisis. This might give the Kremlin food for thought.





* * *



* Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 67 D 548, HO Chron. Secret. The source text bears no drafting information but was initialed by both McGhee and Kohler.

1 Thomas C. Schelling, Professor at Harvard University and member of the U.S. Air Force Scientific Advisory Board.





100. Record of Meeting of the Policy Planning CouncilSource


Washington, June 23, 1961, 4 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

George McGhee

George Morgan

Henry Brodie

John Curtis

Leon Fuller

Henry Owen

Secretary of State Dean Rusk

Henry Ramsey

Edward Rice

Carlton Savage

William Webb

Howard Wriggins



The Secretary opened the meeting by saying that he wanted to give S/P his impressions of the Vienna talks. He said that Khrushchev tried to impress Kennedy with the idea that “communism was here to stay” and that the USSR was “on the right side of history.” The Secretary added that in this respect Khrushchev echoed views expressed in his January 6 speech. He mentioned that Khrushchev had emphasized the vitality of the Soviet system and that the USSR was engaged in a sacred war to “rid backward nations of capitalistic oppression”; the US had on the other hand accepted the mantle of the status quo and our collapse was historically inevitable. The Secretary remarked that he had told Khrushchev that he would make an excellent sales manager for General Motors.

The Secretary said that he was particularly impressed with the targets that Khrushchev evinced—“those countries in which the Soviets find the greatest opportunities are the same ones with which we are having the greatest difficulties.”

The Secretary said that we must reexamine the situation as it existed in the ʼ40s to know how to deal with the present problems. The Secretary mentioned in this context that almost every vote in the UN during the latter part of the ʼ40s was overwhelmingly against the Soviet bloc. Using the Troika doctrine as a “casus belli” we must find ways and means of associating ourselves with the neutrals as well as our allies in order to again consolidate the world against the communist bloc; this should be our aim in the UN this fall. He said that the January 6 speech gave us ample ammunition to indicate to the world that the bloc had declared war on us and practically everyone else.

Mr. McGhee said that we must make issue of Soviet interference in the internal political life of various countries—witness Suslovʼs trip to India during the Indian Communist Party Congress—in order to put Soviet intentions in the proper light. The Secretary replied that this would be difficult because “our hands are not too clean”.

The Secretary said that the US need not become too involved in various regions of the world lest our strength become dispersed; that we should push others to the front. In this context he expressed the feeling that by sponsoring such regional organizations as SEATO and CENTO we had promoted a sharp division among members of these pacts and nonmembers in the respective geographic areas. He said that we must find ways to improve relations among these powers. He agreed that the Commonwealth was a proven device for bringing together disparate elements in a more or less happy union and that we should attempt to strengthen such associations.

Mr. McGhee mentioned that S/P was contemplating a study on the Commonwealth and that he personally felt that Burma would join the Commonwealth if asked.

The Secretary said that we should try to aid group arrangements showing any evidence of strength in the Near East and Asia. He cited the All-Asia consultative committee as one association worth considering in this respect.

Mr. McGhee asked the Secretary to what extent Khrushchev would risk war. He added that it seemed Khrushchev had outdone Mr. Dulles1 in a policy of brinkmanship.

The Secretary replied that Khrushchev was interested in establishing a status quo in Europe and that he was currently worried about the rise of neo-nationalism in the bloc European states. He said that Khrushchev did not consider Berlin a problem per se but that he would like to use it as a means of further reducing US prestige. He said that Khrushchev seemed to be convinced that there would not be a nuclear war and he was of course right in believing that the USSR military position on the ground was in his favor. The Secretary added that Cuba and Laos were not serious factors in the present Soviet strategy. In reply to a question from Mr. Owen, the Secretary stated that the Presidentʼs statements on our position regarding Berlin and Germany had had no profound effect on Khrushchev.

The Secretary asked who performed policy planning in the Kremlin? Mr. McGhee answered that he had asked Zorin the same question and that he was given no specific information on the subject other than there were planners at every level of Soviet government.

The Secretary remarked that it was obvious that the Soviets had made some fairly fundamental and far-reaching decisions in the last several years and that they were not going to subject any of their vital interests to a third party, e.g., disarmament, the Congo.

The Secretary concluded that we must have a policy on Berlin that would force Khrushchev to realize that continuing on his present course would mean sacrificing his position among the uncommitted nations. (As an aside, the Secretary said that he was impressed that Khrushchev was willing to make the sacrifice.) He said that the only way we could affect a world community position against the bloc would be to assay what mistakes we had made and what mistakes the Russians had made; this should be a principal task of S/P.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199. Secret. Drafted by Curtis.

1 John Foster Dulles, Secretary of State until April 1959.





101. Editorial Note


In a memorandum to President Kennedy, June 26, 1961, McGeorge Bundy discussed closing out the bilateral talks which had begun in Washington June 19 between John McCloy and Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Valerian Zorin in an effort to reach agreement on an appropriate forum for multinational general disarmament negotiations. Bundy noted that both Adlai Stevenson, U.S. Representative to the United Nations, and McCloy believed that the Soviets “no longer feel—if they ever did—that anything serious can be accomplished.” McCloy and Zorin met for the last time on June 30 and agreed to reconvene in mid-July. During a meeting with President Kennedy on June 30, Zorin raised the issue of merging the test ban talks with those on general disarmament should the test talks fail. President Kennedy reaffirmed his opposition to such a move. McCloy and Zorin met in Moscow seven times between July 17 and July 29 but reached no agreement. For text of Bundyʼs memorandum and the memorandum of Kennedyʼs conversation with Zorin, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 97-102.





102. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, June 26, 1961, 10:15 a.m.

On Monday morning at 10:15 a.m., June 26, 1961, the President met with Aleksey Adzhubey, Editor of Izvestia; Mikhail Kharlamov, Chief of the Press Division of the Soviet Foreign Office; and Georgi Bolshikov, Editor of USSR and former Washington correspondent of the TASS News Agency who acted as interpreter.

The President began the discussion by asking Mr. Adzhubey if he had made any progress in his conversation with me relative to improving communications on the journalist level. Mr. Adzhubey replied that we had made progress and that he was looking forward to receiving a memorandum from me on the subject.

The President then said he had read with interest Premier Khrushchevʼs speech in the Soviet Union yesterday1 in which the Soviet Premier had described the United States as a “worn out runner” and predicted the Soviet Union would surpass us economically in 1970.

The President cited a number of figures to the Soviets showing that their economic growth estimates were impossible—that the USSR could not pass us by 1970-1978. These figures showed that in 1913 when Russia was under the czars, their Gross National Product (GNP) was 43% of the United States. In 1959 it was 47%. He said by the best possible estimates of Soviet growth and the lowest possible estimates of United States growth, the Soviet UnionʼsGNP would be only 62% by 1978. He said this in itself would be a remarkable advance for the Soviet people and would bring them to a standard of living comparable to that of the United States in 1960. The President said that this was the area of competition that we should engage in. He said that the Soviet Union should not force us into a war. The President said that we should all be around in 1978 to see whether or not Mr. Khrushchevʼs estimates were true.

Mr. Adzhubey interrupted to say that the Soviet Union figured on increasing from 11% to 11-1/2% while the President computed it at 6%. The President said that the Russians were entitled to their figures as we were also entitled to ours and that we would guarantee a world at peace to allow us to find out who is right. The President said it was like the story of a high-jumper: progressing from one foot to six feet could be done very easily but from six feet up the progress can be only measured in inches.

The President said he could not understand why the Soviet Premier wanted to force the United States out of Berlin. He said that West Berlin was a symbol for Americans and that if we gave up our rights in Berlin he would be impeached by the American people. Mr. Adzhubey replied by saying that he did not believe that he would be impeached. Adzhubey continued by saying that the Soviet Union merely wanted to make a treaty with East Berlin; they did not want to force the United States out of West Berlin but wanted the right to have Russian troops in West Berlin. The President pointed out that the subject of a treaty with East Germany was not the issue. He said that he had read Mr. Ulbrichtʼs statements recently where Mr. Ulbricht was threatening to shut off access to East Berlin; threatened to close Templehof Airport and that the United States could not and would not stand for this. The President said the United States and the Soviet Union were the two most powerful nations in the world. Why should they fight and leave everything to the rest of the world—including the Chinese.

In relation to the subject of Soviet troops in West Berlin the President said he had not yet heard any proposal for allowing American troops in East Berlin. The President said that when the war came to a close perhaps the lines could have been drawn so that matters would be different now. But the lines were drawn as they were and the United States has long-standing commitments to West Berlin and it cannot go back on these commitments. Mr. Adzhubey said that he could not understand all the concern in the United States over West Berlin; the Soviet Union had proposed that Berlin become a free city; that French, American, British, Soviet, Swedish and Indian troops be allowed in West Berlin. The President said that reading Mr. Ulbrichtʼs remarks he did not think that Mr. Ulbricht grasped the real significance of a “free city”. Under Mr. Ulbrichtʼs proposal, Berlin would not be a free city. The President said that if the Soviet Union was so desirous of West Berlin being a free city, why didnʼt the Soviet Union just keep the “status quo” because West Berlin is, in effect, now a free city. Again the President said he heard no proposal by the Soviet Union to allow American troops into East Berlin. He also pointed out that West Berlin had not become a part of the Federal Republic while East Berlin had been incorporated into the East German Democratic Republic.

The President said that American forces in West Berlin were token in nature—10,000 men—a symbol of our commitments; that we were going to maintain these commitments.

The President reiterated the hope that the United States could live in peace with the Soviet Union and that that had been his hope since taking office.

The President pointed out that American troops had not been sent into Laos and Cuba (in the latter case, there was a desire by the American people to do so). Mr. Adzhubey said he understood this; the Soviet Union had not sent troops into Laos either.

Mr. Adzhubey concluded the conversation by saying that perhaps the Soviet Union could also send a token force into West Berlin—17 nurses. The President laughingly said that perhaps it could be worked out.

The President then took Mr. Adzhubey, Mr. Kharlamov and Mr. Bolshikov into the Fish Room where he showed them the model boat which Mr. Khrushchev sent to him. Mr. Adzhubey said that our exchanges should be in boats of this type.

Pierre Salinger2

Press Secretary to the President



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, Presidentʼs Office Files, USSR. Confidential.

1 For text of Khrushchevʼs speech on June 25, see Pravda, June 26, 1961.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.





103. Editorial Note


In a report transmitted to President Kennedy on June 28, 1961, Special Consultant Dean Acheson contended that the issue over Berlin was far more than an issue over that city. “It has become an issue of resolution between the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R., the outcome of which will go far to determine the confidence of Europe—indeed, of the whole world—in the United States.” Until the Russians were shown that what they want to do was not possible, Acheson stated, “no negotiation can accomplish more than to cover with face-saving devices submission to Soviet demands.” It was necessary to devise “a course of conduct which will change the present apparent Russian disbelief that the United States would go to nuclear war over Berlin, rather than submit.” For text of Achesonʼs report, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XIV, pages 138-159.

In National Security Action Memorandum No. 58, June 30, President Kennedy instructed the Secretaries of State, Defense, and Treasury to submit recommendations for possible military, economic, and other actions against the Soviet Bloc should the latter increase tension over Berlin. For text of the NSAM, see ibid., pages 162-165. Alternative strategies for dealing with Berlin were discussed at a National Security Council meeting on July 13 and at a meeting of the Steering Group that followed. Secretaries Rusk and McNamara favored proceeding with all measures not requiring the declaration of a national emergency. For text of the memorandum of discussion, see ibid., pages 192-194.

The Steering Group again discussed Berlin at a meeting just prior to the National Security Council meeting on July 19. According to the minutes, Secretary Rusk “indicated his support for a military program with three characteristics: 1. A present build-up; 2. A capability to stop DDR troops by the end of 1961; 3. An ability to fight conventional war for several weeks against Soviet forces, at the same point in time.” In National Security Action Memorandum No. 62, July 24, Kennedy authorized a “prompt strengthening of the United States military position, including giving the U.S. “the capability of deploying as many as six additional divisions and supporting air units to Europe at any time after January 1, 1962, that the international situation many warrant it.” For text of the Steering Group minutes and NSAM No. 62, see ibid., volume XIV, pages 219-222 and 225-226.

In a speech to the nation the evening of July 25, President Kennedy stated that the United States “cannot and will not permit the Communists to drive us out of Berlin.” He outlined six steps the United States would take in the military field “to meet this threat to peace.” For text of the speech, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pages 533-540. In telegram 323 to the Department of State, July 28, the Moscow Embassy reported that in a meeting with John McCloy the previous day Chairman Khrushchev stated that the “President in effect had declared preliminary war on Sovs because he had presented Sovs with ultimatum and had said if ultimatum not accepted that would mean war. Sovs regretted President took this course, but accepted challenge and would not change policy directed at signing peace treaty.” For text of telegram 323, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XIV, pages 231-234.





104. Editorial Note


A report prepared by an Ad Hoc Committee of the United States Intelligence Board and approved by the USIB on July 11, 1961, assessed the extent of Sino-Soviet Bloc military collaboration with the Castro regime in Cuba. The report concluded that the Soviet Bloc was extending “considerable military assistance to Cuba in the form of military equipment, training, and technicians and advisers.” Soviet Bloc military equipment, together with purchases from Western sources, had contributed substantially to a major military buildup, strengthening Castroʼs dictatorship and giving him ground forces that were “probably now better equipped than those of any Latin American country.” His regime provided “a better base of operations for subversion and propaganda throughout Latin America than the Soviets have ever had.” For text of the report, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume X, pages 621-624.





105. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, July 17, 1961.

SUBJECT

Export of Research Equipment to Soviet Bloc



PARTICIPANTS

Secretary Hodges, Mr. Behrman and Mr. George (Commerce)

Secretary Rusk and Mr. Whitman (State)

Secretary McNamara (Defense)

Chairman Seaborg (A.E.C.)

Mr. Dryden (NASA)

Mr. Guthe and Mr. Weber (C.I.A.)



Mr. Hodges presented the questions of (1) any desirable change in policy on export of research equipment to the Soviet bloc and (2) the specific case of a Van de Graaff accelerator for Poland.

Mr. Rusk stated the U.S. position as one of openness and cooperation in basic science. Science is inherently international in character. Many of the true scientists in bloc countries are not political and to this extent they offer a constructive contact. The Rockefeller Foundation Science Project with Polish scientists exemplifies a healthy enterprise.

We should not change policy at this time just because of a potential Berlin crisis. If the crisis should require certain restrictive actions in the future, they would be made by policy decision at the time.

Policy might dictate some selectivity between different countries of the bloc group, e.g. Poland over the U.S.S.R. and Rumania over Bulgaria. He suggested that Whitman might help the Export Control people if such an issue arises. He added that the Government should not urge a manufacturer to sell equipment to a bloc country against his wishes. He ended with the observation that attempts to restrict pure science might resemble the tale of King Canute and the Tide. He then left the meeting but returned later.

Mr. McNamara said that, while pure research of course may have an effect on military capability, the Department of Defense should object to export only if the proposed shipment added a substantial increment of military power. Otherwise, political considerations were the dominant factors and the State Department should therefore be the judge. He believed that the Department of Defense has in the past been much too restrictive about exports of scientific equipment.

He recommended that a 30-day time limit be established for giving a Yes or No answer after a request for an export license has been received, pointing out the disadvantage of long-delayed decisions when the real issues are political.

Mr. Hodges commented that the working group in Commerce should not make decisions between different bloc countries on their own judgment and that they should expect guidance from State on such policy matters. He anticipated that a decision to ship the accelerator to Poland would bring criticism but he was quite willing to take it if he were assured of support. Mr. Rusk, Mr. McNamara and Dr. Seaborg volunteered support.

Mr. Hodges then announced that (1) shipment of the accelerator will be approved, (2) he is satisfied that basic policy should not be changed at this time and (3) the 30-day time limit proposed by Mr. McNamara is to be adopted.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 460.119/7-1761. Secret. Drafted by Walter Whitman, Science Advisor in the Department of State, and approved in S on July 20.





106. Editorial Note


On March 17, 1961, Secretary of State Rusk transmitted to President Kennedy the draft of an air transport agreement with the Soviet Union. (Department of State, NSAMs: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 32) Following approval by the President on March 21 (NSAM 32, ibid.; Claflin, The President Wants To Know, page 55), the draft was sent to the Soviet Embassy, and the two sides agreed to begin discussion of the agreement at Washington on July 18. James M. Landis, Special Assistant to the President, chaired the U.S. delegation, while Colonel General Yevgeni E. Loginov, Chief of the Main Administration of the Soviet Air Fleet, led the Soviet delegation. A copy of Landisʼ instructions for the negotiations is in Department of State, Central Files, 611.6194/7-1861.

The delegations met 11 times before reaching an agreement on a draft text on August 4. Records of these meetings are ibid., 611.6194/7- 1861 through 8-461 and 911.7261/7-861 through 8-361. Two days later in requesting authority to sign the agreement, the Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State, pointed out that the U.S. objectives in the negotiations had been achieved, including agreement to direct reciprocal flights between New York and Moscow, a commitment by the Soviet Union to adhere to applicable International Civil Aviation Organization standards, provisions for the inspection of each sideʼs aircraft, and Soviet agreement not to land at airfields where U.S. or allied military forces were stationed. (Memorandum from E to the Acting Secretary of State; ibid., 611.6194/8-1061)

However, in response to the closing of the sector border between East and West Berlin on August 13, President Kennedy decided “that this was not an appropriate time to sign a bilateral air agreement with the Soviets in view of the international situation.” (Kohler memorandum for the files, August 18; ibid., 611.6194/8-1861) The Department of State informed the Soviet Embassy along these lines on August 19, and 2 days later Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs U. Alexis Johnson and Loginov initialed the agreement rather than signing it. (Telegram 497 to Moscow, August 21; ibid., 611.6194/8-2161)





107. Editorial Note


In a July 20, 1961, memorandum to President Kennedy, Robert Komer of the National Security Council Staff recommended “stepping up the momentum in South Vietnam. I believe it very important that this government have a major anti-Communist victory to its credit in the six months before the Berlin crisis is likely to get really hot. Few things would be better calculated to show Moscow and Peiping that we mean business than an obvious (if not yet definitive) turnaround in Vietnam.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume I, pages 234-236.





108. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, July 27, 1961.

SUBJECT

U.S.-U.S.S.R. Exchanges (Meeting with Mr. Coombs)



PARTICIPANTS

Mr. S.K. Romanovsky, Deputy Chairman of the Soviet State Committee for Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries

Mr. V.M. Kamenev, Deputy Chief of the American Section of the Committee

Mr. Yuri I. Volsky, Cultural Counselor, Soviet Embassy

Mr. Dmitri D. Muraviev, First Secretary, Soviet Embassy

Mr. Sokolov, Interpreter, Soviet Embassy

CU—Mr. Philip H. Coombs

CU—Mr. Max Isenbergh

EUR/SES—Frank G. Siscoe

EUR/SES—Jack R. Perry

LS—Miss Natalie Kushnir



Mr. Coombs welcomed Messrs. Romanovsky and Kamenev to this country and to the discussions on American-Soviet exchanges, and expressed the hope that the promising cultural ties between our countries would continue to develop.

Mr. Romanovsky thanked Mr. Coombs for the opportunity to visit with him and to discuss the exchange program. Mr. Romanovsky then made the following statement:

The Soviet Union believed in the widest possible contacts through cultural, educational and scientific-technical exchanges. The present exchanges agreement and the previous one have proved that both countries gain from this contact. Enough time has passed to judge the value of the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Exchanges Agreement of November 21, 1959:1 in the Soviet view, it has been fulfilled satisfactorily. In some sections of the Agreement, however, there has been unsatisfactory implementation owing to the attitude of the American side: for example, in exchanges of scientists, films, and of representatives of social organizations. The Soviet side wishes to remove these obstacles, and wished to discuss concrete ways of so doing.

As you know, Mr. Romanovsky continued, the Soviet Union stands for further development of exchanges, and proposes negotiations for a new exchanges agreement to cover 1962-1963; we know from your statements that you agree. Taking into consideration the established scientific, technical and cultural relations between our countries, the Soviet side believes we should put these relations on a firmer legal basis. The Soviet side would like to sign a Cultural Convention on the principles of scientific, technical and cultural exchanges. However, knowing American difficulties in signing such a convention, the Soviet side proposes an exchange of letters between the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the U.S.S.R. and the Secretary of State concerning the principles of exchanges.

Mr. Romanovsky then read the text of the Soviet draft letter, and presented copies. (A translation is appended.) Mr. Romanovsky concluded that the Soviet side was interested in hearing concrete proposals for the 1962-1963 agreement, and observed that the Soviet proposals aimed at a further strengthening of ties between the countries.

Mr. Coombs said that he wished to welcome Messrs. Romanovsky and Kamenev again, and that he was sure their presence meant a genuine interest in expanding exchanges. He pointed out that although he was new in his present position, having been in the field of education before, he was greatly interested in furthering international exchanges, and was especially interested in American-Soviet exchanges. Mr. Coombs said this Administration had already shown the great interest it had in educational and cultural exchanges. In fact, he added, the existence of an Assistant Secretary for Educational and Cultural Affairs demonstrated the importance we attached to this field. For his own part, he said, when he looked at the brief period American- Soviet exchanges had been carried on, he was impressed not with the difficulties but with the progress made in such a short time.

Mr. Coombs then made the following statement:

Our countries have two fundamental areas of agreement with regard to exchanges: first, we have both found our experience to date in exchanges desirable and beneficial; second, we both want to move on, to enlarge and improve exchanges. Both sides could cite impediments, but there is little to gain from charges and counter-charges in these discussions. The United States side was heartened by the action of the Soviet Government in improving access of American exchange students and professors to laboratories and archives in the U.S.S.R., and in enabling them to travel more freely. We were especially pleased at this, because the absence of these facilities make it difficult for our ablest students to go to the U.S.S.R. for a year instead of continuing their studies at home. We hope this action augurs well for future exchanges. We agree that if we can use your visit to discuss specific points for improvement, then further negotiations for a new concrete exchange arrangement can proceed more easily.

For our part, Mr. Coombs continued, we have numerous specific points in mind, of which a few might be cited as examples: 1. In the academic field, we hope for an increase in the exchange of able graduate students, and hope also for the exchange of professors for a sufficient period of time to make their visits useful. The key to this exchange is creating conditions in each country that will make it possible for the best students and professors to devote this time to study in the other country. For our students and professors, going to the U.S.S.R. is entirely voluntary, and they have many alternatives; they must see Soviet study as the best alternative or we cannot persuade them to go. We hope also that this exchange will be well balanced, with participation from students in all major fields—from scientific to humanistic—across the full academic spectrum.

2. Another step forward in the academic realm would be in the field of language study. Russian study has been limited in the United States, and we welcome the opportunity to send language students to the U.S.S.R., to have Soviet teachers here, and to contribute also to Soviet study of English.

3. Another mutually beneficial exchange would be in the field of educational administration: how to organize and conduct an educational system. We all have problems of expanding and improving our school systems, and can certainly learn from each other.

4. We are very much interested in bringing our peoples into closer contact through books, magazines, radio-television, and so forth. Only through this wider informational contact can we move more rapidly toward better understanding and elimination of misconceptions. We feel that at present American citizens who want to learn about the U.S.S.R. have more opportunity than your citizens who want to learn about us. For example, Soviet books are sold freely in American bookstores, but Soviet citizens do not have access to American publications. If we are serious about expanding mutual understanding, we will expand the exchange of books, magazines, radio and television programs. We must face honestly the fact that you do not want to receive American propaganda material, nor are we well disposed toward receiving Soviet propaganda. But there is a wide area beyond propaganda—for example, music, art, culture—and we should expand first in this area, where expansion is easiest.

5. Of particular interest to me is the exchange of educational radio and television materials. America has experimented a great deal in this field, and an exchange would enrich both educational systems.

6. Cultural presentations has been an especially gratifying field: both peoples have welcomed the otherʼs performing artists. These exchanges should not only be expanded but made more valuable by sending artists to a larger number of cities—small as well as large—so that wider contact could be established. It would also be well to emphasize younger performers—talented university students, for example—for if we put our young people into communication we shall do more than anything else could to improve understanding. We were gratified that the Michigan University Symphonic Band did so well in the U.S.S.R., and would welcome similar Soviet groups, small or large, at our cities and universities.





Mr. Coombs concluded by saying that Mr. Siscoe would be responsible for conducting the detailed discussions. He said that in his view conditions were favorable for making progress in exchanges. Our two countries have been in this activity a short time together, he added, but we are now ready to graduate from elementary to high school. If we put ourselves in the mood of trying to solve problems, rather than in the mood of a chess game, we can solve our problems.

Mr. Romanovsky commented that Mr. Siscoe was already a professor in this field, and Mr. Siscoe replied that all he knew about chess he learned from Russian masters.

Mr. Romanovsky said he wished to emphasize the interest of the Soviet Government in the widest possible contacts, and said the existence of the State Committee for Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries showed this interest. As for Mr. Coombsʼ comments, Mr. Romanovsky said he wished to say a few words. In regard to the exchange of students and professors, he said the Soviet side favored an increase, and regretted that instead of fifty the U.S. side had agreed to only thirty-eight students this year. As for language study, the Soviet side also favored this, and as a first step would recommend implementing the provision for exchanges in this field already in the Exchanges Agreement. The idea of exchanging specialists in school administration, he said, was very interesting. As for publications and radio-television, the Soviet side was in favor of increasing exchanges. Mr. Romanovsky said he wished to point out that Soviet citizens have more opportunity to know American literature and books than vice-versa, for the U.S.S.R. publishes many more American books in translation than the United States does Soviet books. The Soviet Union was for an increase in this field of exchanges. In particular, he added, it favored an increase in circulation of USSR and Amerika. He said he agreed with Mr. Coombsʼ statement about propaganda. Mr. Romanovsky said the Soviet side was also happy about developments in the performing arts field, and he would discuss this in more detail with Mr. Siscoe.

Mr. Romanovsky thanked Mr. Coombs for this exchange of opinions, which he said provided a very favorable basis for the detailed discussions.

Mr. Siscoe then outlined the schedule for discussions: Thursday afternoon, performing arts, education, cinema, tourism; Friday morning, scientific-technical and industrial exchanges; Friday afternoon, information exchanges, and a meeting in the late afternoon with USIA Acting Director Donald Wilson; Monday morning, general summary. Mr. Siscoe noted that this schedule has been compressed at Soviet request, since Messrs. Romanovsky and Kamenev planned to depart Tuesday morning.

Mr. Coombs said he would like to be at the meetings, but was preparing to leave the country soon. Mr. Romanovsky said if possible they would like another meeting with Mr. Coombs Monday after conclusion of discussions, and Mr. Coombs said he would try to be available for such a meeting.2





Attachment3


Text of Soviet Draft Letter

Soviet draft

Exchange of identical letters between A.A. Gromyko, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and D. Rusk, Secretary of State of the United States of America, concerning exchanges in the fields of science, technology, and culture between the two countries

Letter of A.A. Gromyko, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the USSR, to D. Rusk, US Secretary of State

Dear Mr. Secretary: I have the honor to refer to the negotiations which recently took place between the representatives of our two governments on scientific, technical and cultural exchanges between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America. As I understand it, the objective of each of our governments is as follows: 1. To expand comprehensively the scientific, technical and cultural ties between our two countries in the interests of improving mutual understanding between the Soviet and the American peoples and developing international cooperation.

2. To implement scientific, technical and cultural ties between the two countries in accordance with the Constitution and the applicable laws and regulations which are in force in each country, with necessary observance of the principles of respecting sovereignty, non-interference in internal affairs, and equality.

3. To encourage the exchanges of groups of specialists in the field of industry, agriculture, construction, trade, etc.

4. To encourage visits by scientists, persons active in higher education and the educational system, and public health for the purpose of conducting joint studies, exchanging experience, holding lectures, and learning about the achievements of both countries; as well as to encourage exchanges of students and graduate students to attend higher educational institutions.

5. To encourage visits by scientists and experts to international scientific conferences, congresses, symposia, and exhibits held by both countries, and to extend equal opportunities to all participants of such conferences, congresses, symposia, and exhibits.

6. To encourage exchanges of performers and performing troupes, to promote trips of persons active in public and cultural affairs, repre-sentatives of trade-union, womenʼs, youth and other non-governmental organizations.

7. To promote the development of ties in the field of sports by organizing trips of athletes and sports organizations; as well as to encourage tourist trips of American citizens to the USSR and of Soviet citizens to the USA.

8. To promote the development of exchange of information between the two countries by organizing exhibits, exchanging radio and television programs and printed publications. I assume that being guided by the aforesaid principles, both countries will regularly develop and sign agreements between our countries on exchanges in the field of science, technology, health, education, and culture, for terms of two years each.





I hope, Mr. Secretary, that the aforesaid principles will come into force on receipt of your letter containing approval of these principles by your Government.

With assurances of my esteem,

Andrei Gromyko4

Minister of Foreign Affairs of the USSR





* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 511.613/7-2761. Official Use Only. Drafted by Perry.

1 For text of this agreement, see 10 UST, p. 1934.

2 The U.S. and Soviet sides met four times (July 27, 28 (twice), and 31) before the Soviet delegation returned to Moscow. (Memoranda of conversations; Department of State, Central Files, 511.613/7-2761, 7-2861, and 7-3161) In the course of these meetings Romanovsky transmitted a Soviet draft agreement and expressed his regrets that the United States did not have a similar draft ready, while Siscoe stated that the draft letter from Gromyko to Rusk seemed an inappropriate method of dealing with exchanges. The two sides also discussed exchanges in the performing arts, education, science and technology, and media and printed exchanges.

3 Official Use Only. The source text is a Department of State translation.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.





109. Editorial Note


John McCloy, Presidentʼs Adviser for Disarmament, who was in the Soviet Union for bilateral disarmament talks with Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Zorin, met with Chairman Khrushchev on July 26 and 27, 1961. Ambassador Thompson reported on their discussions in telegram 323 to the Department of State, July 28. Khrushchev “asserted Sovs not testing clandestinely and assured McCloy would not do it in future either. Said strong pressure on him to resume tests because many inventions and discoveries had accumulated and designers want to test them. This pressure now stronger in view Berlin situation and threat of war if peace treaty signed.” Khrushchev “conceded no agreement in Geneva in sight since US would not agree to troika and Sovs could not abandon it.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 110-112.

In a July 28 memorandum McGeorge Bundy recorded the Presidentʼs decision to send Arthur Dean back to Geneva about August 20 “to make one last effort” to obtain Soviet agreement to the draft test ban treaty. Should there be no progress within a week, “the President will then announce that in light of Soviet folly he now has concluded that no workable treaty is possible.” Bundy also noted that the “President may, at some appropriate point, reach a decision to authorize stand-by preparations for tests of nuclear weapons, such tests to begin not earlier than 1962.” For text, see ibid., pages 114-115.

Secretary of Defense McNamara informed McCloy in a letter of July 28 that he was recommending that the Committee of Principals propose to the President the initiation of preparations to resume nuclear weapons testing. It now seemed evident, McNamara stated, “that the Soviet Union is not interested in a treaty to discontinue nuclear weapons tests except on terms unacceptable to the U.S.” McNamara proposed a sequence of events starting with “an early announcement that preparations for nuclear tests will start at once, but that the decision to conduct tests will depend on the results of test ban negotiations over the next five or six months,” and culminating in the resumption of tests if treaty negotiations were unsuccessful. McNamara stated further that, following six months of underground testing, ten tests “might be made in and above the atmosphere, on the surface of land or water and underwater, but designed to produce a minimum of radioactive contamination.” For text of McNamaraʼs memorandum, see ibid., pages 116-124.





110. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Ball) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source


Washington, August 1, 1961.

SUBJECT

Export Controls to the Soviet Bloc With Respect to Agricultural Surpluses



In response to your inquiry, I can say that the Department continues to support the decision reached by the Export Control Review Board regarding export of wheat or other commodities to the Soviet Bloc. Specifically, we do not advocate any change at this juncture with regard to the export control criteria which permit the licensing of wheat sales to Russia and the Soviet Bloc.

I well understand the interest of the Commerce Department in being assured that the prevailing policy does in fact represent the considered position of the Executive Branch. I can also sympathize with them in face of the pressure being applied and inquiries whether such exports are not in conflict with the other actions of the United States Government with respect to Berlin. As you know, a continuance of the present export control policy is consistent with the Presidential determination on Berlin; viz, that we should withhold application of economic warfare measures pending development of the situations that it was agreed should trigger such action.

I believe that Carl Kaysen has also brought to your attention the related action we have taken with respect to the amendments proposed by the House for PL-480, one of which would have prohibited the export of agricultural surpluses to the Soviet Bloc. Just as we feel the House amendment would be ill-advised, so we would consider any change in the position taken by the Export Control Review Board to be equally ill-advised.

George W. Ball



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 460.119/8-161. Secret. The source text bears no drafting information, but was attached to a memorandum of transmittal from Battle to Bundy. Another copy of this memorandum is attached to a memorandum from Ball to Rusk, July 31, which shows Ruskʼs approval to send it to Bundy. (Ibid., 611.61/7-3161)





111. Editorial Note


In telegram Secto 22 from Paris, August 7, 1961, Secretary of State Rusk reported to the President on a just concluded meeting on Berlin with his counterparts from the United Kingdom, France, and the Federal Republic of Germany. He called the meeting a “gratifying demonstration of unity and seriousness of purpose.” Although there was some disagreement on tactics, “all four of us agreed that formal negotiations with the Russians should come in October or early November.” The following day, however, Rusk met with President De Gaulle, who stated, according a memorandum of the conversation, “If you see there is something which develops from these negotiations which is worthwhile, we will join you. But you really are doing it on your own account.” De Gaulle continued, “How can we negotiate when Khrushchev insists on what the results will be?” For text of telegram Secto 22 and the memorandum of Ruskʼs conversation with De Gaulle, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XIV, pages 309-316.





112. Editorial Note


On August 13, 1961, the German Democratic Republic introduced control measures that effectively prevented residents of the Soviet Zone and East Berlin from entering West Berlin. At the same time barbed wire and other physical barriers, which eventually became “The Berlin Wall,” were erected to restrict crossings into the Western sectors of the city. Secretary of State Rusk responded on August 13 with a statement calling the restrictions a violation of the Four-Power status of Berlin. For text, see Documents on Germany, 1944-1985, page 776.

At its meeting on August 15 the Berlin Steering Group, according to the minutes, “agreed that the closing of the border was not a shooting issue” but instead “was essentially one of propaganda,” providing an opportunity to “reap a large harvest.” At the groupʼs meeting 2 days later, President Kennedy decided that the United States would reinforce the West Berlin garrison with one battle group (1,500-1,800 men). Secretary of Defense McNamara suggested that the border closing “might portend a speed-up of Khrushchevʼs schedule” and therefore “our own military preparations should be hastened accordingly. There was some disagreement with his diagnosis, but none with his prescription.” For records of both meetings, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XIV, pages 333-334 and 347-349.

In an August 18 letter to Governing Mayor Willy Brandt, President Kennedy stated that “there are, as you say, no steps available to us which can force a significant material change in this present situation. Since it represents a resounding confession of failure and of political weakness, this brutal border closing evidently represents a basic Soviet decision which only war could reverse.” In an August 21 memorandum to Rusk, the President indicated that he wanted to “take a stronger lead on Berlin negotiations.” President De Gaulle wrote Kennedy in a letter of August 26 that he believed “that the opening of negotiations in the present circumstances would be considered immediately as a prelude to the abandonment, at least gradually, of Berlin and as a sort of notice of our surrender.” Nevertheless, in telegram 660 to Moscow, September 3, Rusk instructed Ambassador Thompson to approach Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko in anticipation “that there will be discussion with Soviet representatives in regard to future negotiations” on Berlin. “If Gromyko seems willing to discuss negotiations you might endeavor to ascertain from him what the Soviets envisage as a basis for negotiation.” For text of the four documents, see ibid., pages 352-353, 359-360, 377-378, and 388-389.





113. Special National Intelligence EstimateSource


Washington, August 24, 1961.

SNIE 11-10-61

SOVIET TACTICS IN THE BERLIN CRISIS

The Problem

To estimate Soviet tactics in the Berlin crisis over the next few months, with particular reference to the effect on these tactics of possible developments within East Germany.

The Estimate

1. With the action of 13 August, the Communists have taken a long step toward their objectives in Berlin and have created a new political situation there. The border controls instituted on that date have met East Germanyʼs most pressing need by reducing the refugee flow to tolerable proportions. At the same time, the division of Berlin into two separate cities has been made virtually complete, with the eastern portion all but incorporated into the GDR. Thus the Soviets, induced by the rising tide of refugees, have taken unilateral action to achieve results which they had intended to accomplish at a later date, and by different means.

2. The refugee question, however, was only one aspect of the larger problem of stabilizing the GDR, and the closing of the Berlin escape route may worsen other aspects if it leads to a further buildup of tensions within East Germany. Even apart from this, the stemming of the refugee flow will not change the USSRʼs view of the necessity to bolster the GDRʼs claims to sovereignty with a peace treaty and eventually to eject Western influence from Berlin altogether. We do not believe that the USSR has given up its intention to press for a peace treaty and a “free city.” The question is whether the Soviet leaders will accelerate their movement towards these objectives, or will moderate their pace after their considerable achievements of 13 August.

3. The action in Berlin has initiated a momentum which the Soviets may wish to sustain. A wide variety of further unilateral measures is available to them. The termination of military liaison missions would be a relatively low-keyed act which might appear to the Soviets as a means of keeping events moving in their favor.1 Another option would be to deny Allied rights to enter East Berlin, thereby carrying to its conclusion the destruction of the four-power status of that part of the city. More drastically, the East Germans might disrupt or harass civil traffic between West Berlin and the Federal Republic; most dangerous of all, interference with Allied access might begin. Politically, the USSR might choose to accelerate the timing of a peace conference and a separate treaty with the GDR.

4. Another factor which could importantly affect the USSRʼs timing and tactics is the increasing involvement of Soviet prestige. Khrushchev in recent weeks has reacted to the stiffening US attitude by increasing his commitment to early action. He now asserts that the issue transcends the problems of Germany and Berlin, important as these remain, and that the Westʼs refusal to conclude a peace treaty represents an attempt to achieve a “strategic breakthrough” against the Bloc. In claiming a challenge to Soviet power and prestige, he wishes to convey to his opponents that the Soviet Union cannot be expected to draw back from crisis situations in which reason and prudence would appear to dictate restraint. He might decide to take new steps on Berlin which would strengthen the image of inflexible resolve.

5. In our recent estimates of the USSRʼs policy toward Germany and Berlin, we have regularly attributed to the Soviet leaders a confidence that they can move gradually toward their eventual objectives without incurring unacceptable risks. We have pointed to their belief that the West could probably be induced to make negotiated concessions. And we have further estimated that, if these Soviet expectations are not borne out, the USSR will move unilaterally, but still intending to proceed in such a way as to avoid at any stage unduly high risks of war.2

6. We believe that Soviet actions in the recent phase of the Berlin crisis do not indicate that the USSR has departed from this general approach and method. Thus we conclude that the Sovietsʼ present intention probably is not to take further drastic action immediately, though they may undertake measures of limited scope. For example, they will probably further restrict German civil and Allied access to East Berlin, and they may embark upon a program of gradual harassments of German civil traffic to West Berlin. But rather than pose a major challenge to West Berlin itself and the Allied position there, we believe that their present preference is to let the effects of the border closure sink in and see whether the Western Powers have become more inclined to accept Soviet terms of negotiations.

7. In the absence of fairly definite proposals by the West, we think it unlikely that Khrushchev will take the initiative in formally proposing a date and other specifics for East-West negotiations. He clearly wishes to appear as the champion of negotiations, and he may throw out hints, in an effort to encourage a Western proposal, that the USSR could be persuaded to reduce its demands if a conference were arranged. If presented with a Western invitation, he would respond favorably but would undoubtedly attempt to define the task of the conference in a fashion which served Soviet interests. If the negotiations were in train toward the end of the year, he would probably postpone his deadline for a treaty. If negotiations do not materialize, we believe that the next Soviet step will be to issue invitations to their own peace conference, probably accompanied by a revised draft of a treaty applicable to both German states and providing for the declaration of a “free city” status for West Berlin. We think under these circumstances that the chances are still considerably better than even that the treaty would not be signed before the Party Congress which convenes on 17 October.



Effect of Developments in East Germany

8. Soviet tactics will be affected by a large number of factors, including the posture adopted by the West, the movement of opinion in the important uncommitted countries, and domestic developments in East Germany. We have recently examined the possibility that serious unrest might arise in East Germany and have concluded that, under most circumstances, a major eruption is unlikely;3 here we consider how popular disturbances or an uprising might affect Soviet tactics.

9. The Soviet leaders evidently are confident of their capability for keeping discontent in check and repressing any outbreaks which might occur. If they came to feel that the chances of a general rising were becoming substantial, their main domestic efforts would probably be in the direction of menace and intimidation. They would alert and deploy their own forces in East Germany, as well as those of the GDR, and the public would be warned of the regimeʼs determination to react with speed and vigor to hostile manifestations. Additionally, they would probably make available additional supplies of consumer goods in order to relieve economic shortages.

10. Popular dissatisfaction with internal political and economic conditions would be the basic cause of mass unrest. However, the Communist efforts to consolidate the GDR as a separate German state by isolating it from further contact with the West, combined with the international tension generated by Communist pressures against West Berlin, are adding to popular unrest. Thus, there is a relationship between the degree of unrest in East Germany and Moscowʼs pursuit of its policies aimed at neutralizing West Berlin and fixing the division of Germany, particularly since the 13 August action has deprived the East German regime of a safety valve.

11. Even so, we see little chance that the USSR, if it believed that an East German rising was likely, would respond by altering its principal aims or policies with respect to Berlin. While it is possible that the Soviets might temporarily modify their tactics or extend their timing to reduce the likelihood of a serious German uprising, we think it unlikely that such a Soviet response would be either very significant or lasting. Moreover, we believe that it would be next to impossible to convince the USSR, the GDR, or the East German people that the West intended or had the capability to support widespread anti-regime activities.

12. We believe that the Communists will act speedily and firmly in meeting evidences of public disorder, if these actually develop, in East Germany in the months ahead. If an uprising should occur, they would regard themselves as having no other choice than to put it down, despite the cost to their position and the danger of Western involvement. In the wake of such a repression, the Soviets might accelerate their moves toward a separate peace treaty, believing that it was unprofitable to spend further time in cultivating world opinion or waiting for East-West talks, and that an early treaty would start the process of rebuilding East German sovereignty and authority.





* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency, O/DDI Registry: Job 79-R01012A. Secret. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Army, Navy, and the Air Force, and the Joint Staff participated in the preparation of this estimate, which was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by all the members of the USIB except the representatives of the AEC and FBI who abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

1 Under the occupation, the US, French, and British forces in West Germany presently have military missions accredited to the Soviet Commander in East Germany, who in turn has missions to the three Allied Commanders. [Footnote in the source text.]

2 Our principal estimates on Soviet policy with respect to Berlin and Germany are NIE 11-4-60, “Main Trends in Soviet Capabilities and Policies, 1960-1965,” dated 1 December 1960, paragraphs 161-164, Top Secret; NIE 11-7-61, “Soviet Short-Term Intentions Regarding Berlin and Germany,” dated 25 April 1961, Secret; and SNIE 2-2-61, “Soviet and Other Reactions to Possible US Courses of Action with Respect to Berlin,” dated 11 July 1961, Top Secret, Limited Distribution. [Footnote in the source text. Copies of NIE 11-4-60 and SNIE 2-2-61 are in the Johnson Library, National Security File, National Intelligence Estimates. A copy of NIE 11-7-61 is in the Central Intelligence Agency, O/DDI Registry: Job 79-R01012A.]

3 SNIE 12-4-61, “Stability of East Germany in a Berlin Crisis,” dated 15 August 1961, Secret. [Footnote in the source text. A copy is ibid.]





114. Editorial Note


In a memorandum to the Presidentʼs senior advisers on disarmament, August 29, 1961, McGeorge Bundy stated that the President had directed him, in consultation with the Departments of State and Defense and the Atomic Energy Commission, to “recommend the appropriate time for the AEC to make an announcement about the resumption of contingent preparations for nuclear testing and for the President to issue a statement that this does not mean we were resuming tests at any given time.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, page 148. The next day the Soviet Union announced that it was resuming nuclear testing. In response, the United States issued a statement recalling Arthur Dean from the negotiations in Geneva. For text of the Soviet and U.S. statements, see Documents on Disarmament, 1961, pages 337-350.

Following a series of meetings and telephone consultations among President Kennedy and his advisers on September 2, the President decided to ask the British Government to join the United States in publicly proposing to the USSR a ban on nuclear tests in the atmosphere. For documentation on the discussions, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 158-160. For text of the ensuing proposal by President Kennedy and Prime Minister Macmillan, issued jointly in Washington and London on September 3, see Documents on Disarmament, 1961, page 351.

In National Security Action Memorandum No. 87, September 5, the President ordered resumption of underground weapons testing. In response to a memorandum of September 21 from McGeorge Bundy, indicating that the President wanted the schedule for resumption of nuclear testing accelerated, Glenn Seaborg, Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, stated in a letter to the President, October 7, that any acceleration would require testing in the atmosphere. For text of NSAM 87 and Seaborgʼs letter, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 162 and 192-193.

At an October 10 meeting of the Committee of Principals on nuclear testing, Herbert Scoville of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency noted that the Soviets had conducted 24 nuclear tests since August 30, including 4 to 6 short-range missile launchings and one test at 100,000 to 200,000 feet. Secretary of Defense McNamara indicated that, in a memorandum to the President the previous day, Deputy Secretary of Defense Gilpatric had strongly urged making preparations for atmospheric testing. President Kennedy approved this course of action on October 11. For text of the memorandum of the Committeeʼs conversation, see ibid., pages 197-202. Kennedyʼs approval is noted in a letter from McNamara to the President, October 31. (Ibid., page 215)





115. Editorial Note


In a September 5, 1961, memorandum to Presidentʼs Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs Rostow, Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff discussed the possibility that Chairman Khrushchev might see “short run advantages” during the Berlin crisis in “stepping up the level of Communist military activity in Southeast Asia.” Johnson suggested that the United States “utilize the concern of the neutrals about the Berlin situation to help deter Khrushchev” from taking such action. “We can do this by making explicit ties between the two situations. I believe this might be usefully done in the Presidentʼs speech to theUN.” In a September 15 memorandum to President Kennedy, Rostow proposed appropriate language that Kennedy might use in his UN speech. For text of Johnsonʼs and Rostowʼs memoranda, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume I, pages 293-295 and 298-300. In his speech to the UN General Assembly on September 25, President Kennedy made no explicit tie between the two situations, but he did discuss the “smoldering coals in Southeast Asia” and the “dangerous crisis in Berlin”—“two threats to the peace which are not on your crowded agenda, but which causes us, and most of you, the deepest concern.” For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pages 618-626.

In telegram 373 to the Department of State from Saigon, September 18, Ambassador Nolting proposed a demarche to the Soviet Government regarding Vietnam in light of a report that on September 12 Georgi Pushkin, Soviet negotiator at the Geneva Conference on Laos, had told Ambassador Harriman that (in Noltingʼs words) the “USSR ‘could and would control northern Vietnam’ re Laotian settlement” and had given “faint indication of possible Soviet interest in settling hostilities between two parts Vietnam.” However, in a memorandum for the record, October 5, Assistant Secretary of Defense William Bundy noted that at the Planning Group Luncheon on October 3, “the suggestion that talking direct to the Soviets [on Vietnam] might have some use was pretty unanimously rejected.” For text of both documents, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume I, pages 301-304 and 321.





116. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, September 9, 1961, 7:15 p.m.

SUBJECT

Soviet Protest Against “Bandit Raid” on Soviet Embassy, Resulting in Setting Fire in Ambassadorʼs Quarters



PARTICIPANTS

Mr. M.N. Smirnovsky, Charge dʼAffaires, Soviet Embassy

Mr. Igor D. Bubnov, Third Secretary, Soviet Embassy

The Secretary

Mr. Foy Kohler, EUR

R.H. Davis, EUR



At 7:15 p.m., the Secretary received the Soviet Charge, who had demanded to see the Secretary personally on “urgent business” late this afternoon. Mr. Smirnovsky, reading from pencilled notes, said he had come to protest the “bandit raid” this afternoon on the Soviet Embassy and an attempt to set fire to the Embassy. He called this criminal persecution which could have the gravest consequences. He demanded that the criminals be apprehended and punished severely. He also demanded that all necessary security measures be taken to protect the Embassy. He concluded that he was reporting this affair to Moscow.

The Secretary questioned Mr. Smirnovsky at some length and learned the following rather confusing details. According to Mr. Smirnovsky, they had discovered the fire in the Ambassadorʼs quarters on the third floor of the Embassy at 4:45 p.m. No one had been seen to enter the Ambassadorʼs quarters, but entry had been made through a window which was broken and he thought that those responsible might have come over the roof from the adjoining Washington Post building. He remarked he had been told some correspondents were taking pictures. The fire had been set in many places, including against the curtains and the Ambassadorʼs bed. It was not a big fire and they had not informed the police or the fire department, but had extinguished the fire through their own means. He did not know if there had been any attempt to steal anything. At one point, he made reference to finding apples half eaten in the Ambassadorʼs apartment.

In response to the Secretaryʼs question about when Soviet Embassy personnel had last been in the Ambassadorʼs quarters before the fire was discovered, Mr. Smirnovsky merely replied he was not sure, but it could not have been a long time. No one had been seen to enter, but when they found the fire, the room was ablaze.

The Secretary expressed regret that this incident had happened and assured Mr. Smirnovsky that our authorities would do everything to apprehend the criminals and to bring them to justice. He asked if our investigative authorities could inspect the scene of the fire in order to try, through fingerprints, etc., to discover those responsible. Mr. Smirnovsky agreed that the authorities could investigate at the Embassy provided there was someone present from the State Department.1



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Secretaryʼs Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Confidential. Drafted by Davis and approved in S on September 12.

1 On September 13 Tyler sent Rusk a memorandum on the subject of “The Case of the Blazing Bedroom or Arson at the Soviet Embassy” in which he stated that investigation of the fire made clear that it was an inside job for which there was no clear probable motive. (Ibid., 601.6111/9-1361) Two days later Davis informed Smirnovsky of these findings, but he rejected them. (Telegram 788 to Moscow, September 15; ibid., 601.6111/9-1561)





117. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, September 12, 1961.

SUBJECT

Presidential Talks between President Kennedy and Presidents Sukarno and Keita



PARTICIPANTS

President Sukarno of Indonesia

President Keita of MaliVarious members of their entourages

The President

The Secretary of State

The Under Secretary of State

Asst. Sec Phillips Talbot

White House Special Assistant Walt W. Rostow

Mr. Arva Floyd, Desk Officer for Mali (Interpreter)



After an exchange of amenities President Sukarno explained that the mission on which he and President Keita had come to the United States and on which others had gone to Moscow was to persuade President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev as soon as possible to meet together. He hoped that President Kennedyʼs reply would be “OK”. He believed that Premier Khrushchev himself was ready for a meeting with President Kennedy. He had learned this from Mr. Sulzburgerʼs interview with Premier Khrushchev and also from a message he had received from Prime Minister Fanfani of Italy. If asked, the nations which had participated at the Belgrade Conference were also quite willing to give their assistance to bring the two leaders together.

President Keita told President Kennedy that their mission was extremely important given the tension in the world today. The key to peace lay in the hands of the big powers. Hoping that they would use it, the nations represented at Belgrade had asked President Sukarno and him to present this appeal.

President Sukarno then presented the appeal addressed to President Kennedy and signed by the representatives of the states participating at the Belgrade Conference.1

President Kennedy referred to comments that this is a time of transition. That is correct. Societies are changing and this introduces tensions. We in the United States desire change—in a peaceful way. We know quite well that nuclear war would mean widespread destruction at the cost of the lives of a great many people. We are a rich country, as is the USSR. Naturally, therefore, we want to solve issues peacefully. The problem is how to do this.

Describing his talks with Khrushchev in Vienna, when Khrushchev had advanced views which to the best of the Presidentʼs knowledge he had not yet changed, and recent speeches of Ulbricht, President Kennedy explained the United Statesʼ view of the problems of Germany and Berlin. Our real interest is that the German people should be free to decide what kind of government they want. We do not believe Ulbricht represents the German people, but to ascertain what the people of East and West Germany and East and West Berlin really want, we are willing to have a plebiscite under any impartial international group—the UN or any other—and would be glad to accept the verdict so obtained. In other words, we favor self-determination in Germany and in Berlin just as we do in Indonesia, in Africa or anywhere else. We do not want a settlement imposed upon the Germans by us, by Khrushchev or by any one.

If a plebiscite is not an acceptable proposal then the question is what solution can be reached to permit the people of Berlin to live out their lives peacefully. We are not insisting on rights that happen to have been derived from our participation in the war, but on the rights of the people to live as they wish. We know that Khrushchev has the power to sign a “peace treaty” with East Germany. What concerns us is that Khrushchev has held that when the “peace treaty” comes into force our rights in West Berlin would be extinguished and all of West Berlinʼs external communications would be subject to the control of East Germany.

President Kennedy told the emissaries of the Belgrade Conference nations that he would be glad to talk with Khrushchev at any time. There would be no use in doing so, however, until we could understand in what direction some agreement could be found. If Khrushchev and he were to meet today without this understanding, the results would be disastrous. Therefore it would be best for the Foreign Ministers of the two countries to discuss the various possibilities first.

President Sukarno responded that he understood President Kennedy was of the opinion that before meeting Khrushchev he would prefer a meeting of the Foreign Ministers first. If they could discover possibilities of common ground then President Kennedy would be quite willing to see Khrushchev. He said he understood further that President Kennedyʼs main objection to a meeting now was Khrushchevʼs standpoint on Berlin.

President Kennedy reiterated that his main objection was not that Khrushchev had threatened to sign a peace treaty but that in the peace treaty Khrushchev would hold that our rights in Berlin had come to an end. Access would be controlled by the East German Government. But we do not believe that the German Democratic Republic represents the people. Therefore, how could we agree to that? Further, we feel—and believe that the Soviets would agree—that West Berlin wishes to be associated with the West. This means that West Germany must have freedom and you cannot have freedom without communications. We cannot accept any action by Khrushchev that would strangle Berlin. If we were to agree that we and the Atlantic Community would be finished. We would be pushed out of Europe.

President Sukarno recalled his own meeting with Khrushchev2 and said that the latter had told him he was going to sign a peace treaty with East Germany. President Sukarno had understood him to say, however, that access to Berlin would be kept free, but that Berlin would obviously be an enclave in East Germany and communications should therefore be controlled by East Germany.

President Kennedy described this point in effect as the key. If a regime can control food and supplies and transit, then the people of the city are not free.

At the end of World War II we gave up about one third of Eastern Germany that our troops had occupied, but on the basis of the Four Power Agreement that Berlin would be separate until Germany was reunified. If it looks as if reunification wonʼt happen for a while that does not mean that the USSR can therefore give away our rights in Berlin. The rights are not theirs to give.

President Keita observed that their mission to President Kennedy was to point out the necessity of some kind of talks to reduce tension. Whether President Kennedy and Khrushchev would talk personally or have their Foreign Ministers search out the ground was not for the nations represented at Belgrade to say but it would be difficult for the world if there were no talks at all. The non-aligned nations were not trying to say what the nature of the agreement should be. That would depend of course on the discussions.

President Kennedy informed the two Presidents that the Foreign Ministers of Great Britain, France, Germany and the United States are meeting this week to discuss the problem of Germany and that Gromyko is expected to come next week at which time we hope to see what basis may exist for a peaceful solution. Khrushchev had told Mr. Sulzburger that he himself did not think a meeting would be useful at present. After talking with Nehru, however, he said he thought a meeting might help.3 President Kennedy believed that Khrushchev would still agree with him that they should first see what are the real possibilities. Then the two leaders could meet and examine what such terms as guaranteed access really mean.

President Sukarno said that as far as he knew, Khrushchev had told Sulzburger that he would be willing to have a “businesslike meeting” with President Kennedy. Besides, the Italian Ambassador had contacted President Sukarno with a message from Prime Minister Fanfani who had reported that he had contacted Khrushchev on the question of a meeting and that Khrushchev had said yes he would be quite willing to meet President Kennedy.

President Kennedy asked the Presidents whether they thought it would be more useful for him and Khrushchev to meet now or to examine the outstanding questions in close detail first. President Sukarno responded that it is the view of the nations represented at Belgrade that President Kennedy and Khrushchev should meet. As a preliminary move it would no doubt be fruitful to have contacts between the Foreign Ministers. But those should be followed as soon as possible by a meeting of the President and Khrushchev.

President Kennedy said he agreed that this is a very dangerous situation. If Khrushchev should go ahead and sign a peace treaty and then if there should be interference with access to Germany then we could have a war before Christmas. President Kennedy was troubled by the actions of the Soviet Union in this connection. Why for example had the Soviets fired off another hydrogen bomb today?

President Sukarno acknowledged that he too was anxious about that. He had understood the President to say however that he was not opposed in principle to meeting Khrushchev.

President Kennedy said he was not opposed in principle: he just did not want a meeting to occur and to fail. If Ulbricht and Khrushchev could get an understanding of the real meaning of the promise of access, then we could talk freely. He emphasized that we want peace. At the same time we want it understood that if the Soviet Union should sign a peace treaty with East Germany a full guarantee of the right of free access and communications for the people of Berlin must be included. That is what we ask.

As the meeting adjourned President Kennedy explained that he planned to give the Presidents a written reply to their message before their departure from Washington.4



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/9-1261. Confidential. Drafted by Talbot and approved by the White House on September 26 and by S on September 27.

1 For text of this appeal, which was also presented to Khrushchev by Nehru and Nkrumah, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 647-648.

2 Khrushchev visited Indonesia for 12 days in February 1960.

3 In telegram 807 from Moscow, September 7, Thompson reported that in his interview with Cyrus Sulzberger Khrushchev had initially said the time was not right for a summit meeting. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/9-761) Later the same day Thompson sent another telegram saying that Khrushchev wanted the record of the interview to show that he desired a meeting with the President. Thompson assumed that the change in position had been due to Nehruʼs intervention. (Telegram 811 from Moscow; ibid.)

4 For text of the Presidentʼs reply, September 14, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 602-604; for text of Khrushchevʼs reply, September 16, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 656-658.





118. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, September 14, 1961.

East-West Relations

Khrushchev has used a variety of public statements in an effort to create an impression that the USSR is favorably disposed toward the appeal of the Belgrade conference for direct US-Soviet negotiations over Berlin. He has implied, however, that the initiative for making a definite proposal rests with the US and depends on US willingness to demonstrate a desire for “businesslike negotiations.” Khrushchevʼs development of a more conciliatory line over the past week suggests that he considers the neutralistsʼ initiative an opportunity to increase world pressure on the West for early four-power negotiations.

In a wide-ranging interview with C. L. Sulzberger of The New York Times,1 the Soviet Premier implied that, while he is willing to meet with President Kennedy, he doubted that such a meeting would be useful. After Nehru and Nkrumah presented the Belgrade conference appeal for direct talks, Khrushchev amplified his remarks to Sulzberger in a special statement which placed more emphasis on the possibility of a meeting with the President. According to Sulzberger, Khrushchev expressed his satisfaction with Sulzbergerʼs dispatch, which gave prominence to Khrushchevʼs willingness to hold a second meeting with the President. Moscow published Sulzbergerʼs report verbatim on 10 September.

Khrushchevʼs attempt to appear responsive to the appeal for negotiations with the US was also reflected in his speech of 8 September at an Indian-Soviet friendship meeting in honor of Nehru.2 Khrushchev took the line that there was increasing talk in the West that negotiations were required and that President Kennedy had made his remarks of 30 August3 in this spirit. Khrushchev “welcomed” the Presidentʼs statements, but indicated that the USSR still had doubts over US intentions to engage in “serious” negotiations.

In a private conversation with West German Ambassador Kroll, Khrushchev complained of the “diplomatic fuss” over negotiation on Berlin and asked why “we could not simply sit down and discuss the situation.” In reply to the ambassadorʼs remark on the danger of incidents in the Berlin situation, Khrushchev said he was well aware of this and had given strict instructions to Soviet forces in Germany to take every precaution to avoid incidents. Khrushchev also indicated to the ambassador that in his forthcoming speech at Stalingrad, he would be careful not to offend anyone.

Khrushchevʼs Stalingrad speech on 10 September4 portrayed negotiations as increasingly likely. The Soviet leader went to some lengths to attribute to each of the Western leaders a willingness to begin discussions on Germany and Berlin, and drew the conclusion that “glimpses of hope now have appeared” for “peaceful talks.” Soviet propaganda promptly claimed that this speech met with a favorable reception in the West and has been correctly interpreted.

At the conclusion of Nehruʼs visit on 11 September, the joint communiqué contained a statement on Khrushchevʼs agreement to “enter into negotiations with the Western powers … .”5

Berlin

Despite Khrushchevʼs asserted readiness for negotiations, he has adhered to the maximum position that negotiations should be directed toward a German treaty and the creation of a free city in West Berlin. He has also continued to assert that the question of access to Berlin could be resolved. He told Sulzberger that any peace treaty would “legalize” free access to West Berlin and that the “substance” would remain unchanged. He included the standard qualification, however, that in the absence of Western agreement to a treaty with both Germanys, communications to and from Berlin would require agreement with East Germany. The Soviet-Indian communiqué also stated that Khrushchev had informed Nehru of Soviet proposals for “international guarantees” of a free city and for “safeguarding the freedom of communications” between West Berlin and the outside world.

This reference may reflect a reported acceptance by Khrushchev of Nehruʼs proposal that theUSSR, as part of a separate treaty with East Germany, guarantee East Germanyʼs execution of the treatyʼs provisions ensuring free access. Thus far, Khrushchev has refrained from offering such a guarantee of East Germanyʼs performance after a separate treaty. This modification of his position is probably intended to encourage Nehru to continue his efforts.

Nehru apparently intended his proposal to serve as a basis for US-Soviet talks. It underscores his repeated references to the need for solving the access question first, which he feels is the key to a larger East-West accommodation on Germany. Khrushchevʼs acceptance presumably accounted for the Indian leaderʼs cautious optimism in discussing prospects for a negotiated settlement with reporters on his return to New Delhi. Nehru will presumably raise this proposal during his visit to Washington in early November, if not through diplomatic channels before then.

Khrushchev probably feels that Western acceptance of Nehruʼs plan as the basis for a negotiation would open up a wide field for maneuvering to gain de facto Western acceptance of a separate peace treaty and a change in the legal basis for Western access. Khrushchev may also feel that an offer to act as a guarantor of East German actions may satisfy Western requirements by maintaining an outward appearance of continued Soviet responsibility.

Statements by bloc leaders and officials continued to stress the inevitability of a peace treaty before the end of the year. Discrepancies over the timing of a peace conference, however, suggest that no final decision has been made in Moscow. News accounts quoted Polish party secretary Gomulka as stating the treaty would be signed in December, but the Rumanian minister in Washington told US officials that a treaty would be concluded in November. Khrushchev is reported by the Indian press to have sounded out Nehru on the possibility of attending a German peace conference in November. Moscow also is reported by Western diplomats to have begun pressure on Helsinki to join bloc countries in signing a treaty with East Germany. Statements by East German leaders suggest that following the elections in both East and West Germany the bloc may publish a revised draft of a treaty, together with a declaration on a free city for West Berlin.

Khrushchevʼs remarks to Sulzberger and a statement by a Soviet official at the UN indicate that the USSR still views UN consideration of the Berlin question as a last resort, Khrushchev told Sulzberger that the UN could take up the issue if the four powers failed to agree; the Soviet representative said the question would not come before the UN if the West wished to settle it through negotiations.

Military Measures

Moscow has continued to reinforce its diplomatic position by announcements of military measures designed to impress world opinion with Soviet resoluteness over Berlin. On 10 September Moscow published the communiqué of the third meeting of the Warsaw Pact this year.6 The ministers of defense and military chiefs met in Warsaw on 8 and 9 September to discuss specific questions “concerning enhancement of military preparedness of the troops belonging to the joint forces” of pact states. The communiqué stated that the chiefs of the general staffs have been instructed to work out “practical measures to strengthen further the defenses” of the pact members. This provides a broad cover for further bloc moves to counter Western military measures, which the Soviet press is carefully reporting. It is believed that some of the satellites have followed the Soviet lead in retaining conscripts and have called up limited numbers of reservists. Additional steps might include the holding of large-scale exercises and even the movement of additional Soviet troops into Eastern Europe. In a speech on 10 September, Gomulka alluded to continued movement of troop convoys which would be observed by the populace.

The pact meeting coincided with an announcement by Moscow that, between 13 September and 15 October, tests would be held in the Pacific of “more powerful and improved versions of multistage carrier rockets of space vehicles.”

Nuclear Tests

Khrushchev has also used his statements justifying the resumption of testing and rejecting the US-British proposal for a ban on atmospheric tests to improve his political position in the Berlin crisis. He told Sulzberger that the development of several “super powerful bombs” would force the “aggressors to think twice” and that theUSSR was obliged to assure itself of “no lesser capability” than the US, Britain, and France. He claimed that “we shall continue the tests we have started because we cannot ignore the danger that now is being created by the Western countries.” His reference to testing a 100-megaton device, however, was amended to read only the “explosive device” for such a weapon.

In his formal rejection on 9 September7 of the proposal by President Kennedy and Prime Minister Macmillan, Khrushchev adopted the same general line and defended resumption of testing as being forced on the Soviet Union in order to “counter the threats of aggression.” He labeled the US-UK proposal as a propaganda maneuver to permit the US to resume underground tests and allow France to continue its program and thereby obtain a “unilateral advantage” over the Soviet Union. The Soviet Government, Khrushchev stated, “cannot and will not make such a deal.” He added that nuclear tests can be ended “everywhere and forever only on the basis of complete and general disarmament.” But he also claimed that the US-Soviet bilateral talks on disarmament show that the US “does not even want to approach general and complete disarmament.”

The Soviet delegate at the Geneva nuclear talks read this statement into the record at the 340th meeting on 9 September and then pressed for a communiqué stating that the conference had suspended its work, with no reference to a US-UK proposal to state that the talks had recessed until after the UN General Assembly debate. Although the Soviet delegate agreed to a final statement that the conference would be recessed, he clearly implied in the discussion that any further meetings would require agreement on the governmental level and that the USSR would resume talks on a test ban only within the context of general disarmament.

Nehruʼs Visit

The Indo-Soviet communiqué was a restatement of Soviet and Indian views with prime emphasis on the former. The leaders agreed on the “fact” of two Germanys, on the need for “complete and general disarmament under strict and effective international controls,” and on support for anti-French and anti-Portuguese liberation movements in Algeria, Angola, and Goa. On other issues, however, Nehru merely “noted” the Soviet position as “explained” by Khrushchev, expressed no response at all, or was obliquely critical, as on the question of nuclear testing.



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Secret; Noforn. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 1-4 of the Weekly Review section of the issue.

1 For Sulzbergerʼs account of his interview with Khrushchev, see The Last of the Giants (New York: Macmillan, 1970), pp. 788-803.

2 For text, see Pravda, September 9. For the condensed text, see Current Digest of the Soviet Press, vol. XIII, No. 36, October 4, 1961, pp. 7-9.

3 For text of Kennedyʼs remarks at his news conference on August 30, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 572-580.

4 For text, see Pravda, September 11, and Current Digest of the Soviet Press, vol. XIII, No. 37, October 11, 1961, pp. 3-6.

5 For text, see ibid., pp. 7-8.

6 For reports of the meeting, see Pravda, September 10, 1961, and Izvestia, September 12, 1961.

7 For text of Khrushchevʼs statement, see Documents on Disarmament, 1961, pp. 384-391.





119. Editorial Note


On September 21, 1961, the intelligence community issued National Intelligence Estimate 11-8/1-61, “Strength and Deployment of Soviet Long Range Ballistic Missile Forces.” NIE 11-8/1-61 revised and updated NIE 11-8-61, “Soviet Capabilities for Long Range Attack,” issued June 7, 1961, particularly Annex C on “Soviet Long Range Ballistic Missile Forces.” For text of Annex C, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VIII, pages 83-102.

NIE 11-8/1-61 concluded that “new information, providing a much firmer base for estimates on Soviet long range ballistic missiles, has caused a sharp downward revision in our estimate of present Soviet ICBM strength but strongly supports our estimate of medium range missile strength. We now estimate that the present Soviet ICBM strength is in the range of 10-25 launchers from which missiles can be fired against the US, and that this force level will not increase markedly during the months immediately ahead. We also estimate that the USSR now has about 250-300 operational launchers equipped with 700 and 1,100 n.m. ballistic missiles. The bulk of these MRBM launchers are in the western USSR, within range ofNATO targets in Europe.” The estimate concluded further that “Soviet professions of greatly enhanced striking power thus derive primarily from a massive capability to attack European and other peripheral targets. Although Soviet propaganda has assiduously cultivated an image of great ICBM strength, the bulk of the USSRʼs present capability to attack the US is in bombers and submarine-launched missiles rather than in a large ICBM force. While the presentICBM force poses a grave threat to a number of US urban areas, it represents only a limited threat to US-based nuclear striking forces.”

The estimate noted, however, that the USSR was pressing development of a second generation ICBM system that would probably be ready for operational use sometime in the latter half of 1962. “After this point, we anticipate that the number of operational launchers will begin to increase significantly,” with the force level in mid-1963 approximating 75-125 operational ICBM launchers. For text, see ibid., pages 131-138.





120. Editorial Note


In telegram 1691 to Paris, September 22, 1961, the Department of State reported that in a 3-hour discussion the previous day Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko and Secretary of State Rusk had laid out their respective positions on Berlin. “Gromykoʼs presentation did not deviate from standard version of main Soviet themes as developed at Vienna and thereafter.” Rusk stressed that the “current Berlin crisis was essentially of Soviet creation” and that changes in status quo desired by the Soviets “would move against vital interests and fundamental commitments of US.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XIV, pages 431-433.

On September 29 Chairman Khrushchev wrote President Kennedy the first in a series of letters, delivered through special emissaries and closely held, that later became known as the “Pen Pal Correspondence.” Khrushchev repeated standard Soviet positions on Berlin and Germany but suggested Kennedy either send a special emissary to Moscow to discuss Berlin or authorize Ambassador Thompson to do so. For text, see ibid., volume VI, pages 25-38.





121. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, September 25, 1961.

SUBJECT

US-Soviet Relations



PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Mikhail A. Menshikov

The Under Secretary of State



I met with Ambassador Menshikov at the Soviet Chancery at 16th Street at 12:00 noon on September 25th. He has suggested lunch on several occasions, stressing that while he had no specific instructions, he would like to see me to exchange views. I left at 1:25 p.m.

Nothing of importance came out of the discussion. For the most part, Menshikov advanced the line that Khrushchev had opened up in Vienna and which is now readily available to us in Pravda and elsewhere. His purpose apparently was to induce me to spell out more specifically what we were willing to do.

I repeated what the Secretary said to Gromyko,1 and suggested that since Menshikov and I were unlikely to be able to negotiate a settlement, it was a waste of time for us to go over the same ground in general terms. At some stage it would be necessary for them to spell out precisely what they mean by their assertion that they would not interfere with access to Berlin. It would be up to the negotiators to find common ground if, as I hoped, common ground existed.

I added that in my opinion it would be a mistake for Mr. Khrushchev and President Kennedy to go into any conference unless it was well established in advance that agreement would result from it; that if they negotiated directly and the negotiations failed, the danger of war would vastly increase, since it would appear there was no other alternative.

Menshikov asserted that Attorney General Robert Kennedyʼs speech2 was provocative and threatening and that it would undoubtedly require some response from Moscow. I asked him if he had really read what the Attorney General had said. When he said he had only seen the newspaper reports, I pointed out that the Attorney General had referred to the use of nuclear weapons only in defense of Berlin and our interest there, and not in any threatening sense; it was a clear statement of an obvious fact, i.e., that if we were attacked, we would defend ourselves with whatever weapons were necessary.

I pointed out that Khrushchev on many occasions had used more provocative words, i.e. he could destroy Britain with eight or ten bombs, that he could blow up Italy with even fewer, and that the Acropolis would be one of the casualties along with the Greek people if Greece did not cooperate with the U.S.S.R.

Menshikov responded mildly, stressing that Khrushchevʼs remarks had been made in private conversations and not intended for publication. They were simply his way of expressing his concern over the possibility of war, etc.

I then asked Menshikov what Khrushchev had meant by his willingness to see the United Nations facilities transferred to Berlin. Menshikov stated that he had no instructions on this subject and had only heard indirectly that Khrushchev had said this.

He went on to say that the United Nations should not be in New York, that this was not good for us or others, since there were groups of Americans with violent views. From what he knew therefore the Soviet would be willing to negotiate the development of United Nations activities in Berlin. I said that we had no position on the subject but that in one way or another it might come up in discussions later.

In the last ten minutes I expressed the strong hope to Menshikov that he and his government have a better understanding of our country and its interests and objectives than I sometimes felt they had. In the course of this particular discussion I made the following points: 1. That President Kennedy, Secretary Rusk, Adlai Stevenson, Arthur Dean, Jack McCloy, myself, and others in the Administration had come into office with a strong desire to reach some kind of agreement with the Soviet Union which would allow us to work constructively to establish a peaceful and rational world;

2. That none of us could be classed as haters of the Soviet Union or in any way antagonistic to the interest of the Soviet people. And although we were disappointed and felt that we had been rebuffed, we had in no sense given up hope that some better relationship could develop in the future;

3. That if the present leadership of the United States is unable to reach reasonable agreements with the Soviet Union we will be replaced by others who will follow a far harder line.

Even though the Kremlin should somehow maneuver us into a position over Berlin that was to their immediate advantage and to our disadvantage, it would be a pyrrhic victory since it would leave America embittered, and no less militarily powerful;



4. That he must realize that while we were anxious to find ways of living and working with the Soviet Union, we were not afraid, and they should not ever assume that we lacked the will to protect our interests.





I pointed out that he personally had made remarks suggesting that we lacked that will and that this was dangerous. Anyone who had not known the British people in 1939 might have assumed their unwillingness to fight as they did in 1940 and 41 when they faced up to the entire Nazi power. I said that while the British, French, and Americans were often divided on small matters, they were united on large issues, and it was important that he understand this.

Menshikov hastened to comment on my reference to the story that he had said we would not fight. He said that the question had been asked him by someone in the Germany Embassy whose name he did not know, and it was taken entirely out of context. He seemed particularly anxious to correct what he said was a false impression.

My general impression was that Menshikov was less anxious to argue than usual and was almost mellow in his general approach. There were none of the angry replies encountered on previous occasions.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Secretaryʼs Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Drafted by Bowles and approved in U on September 28.

1 See Document 120.

2 Presumably a reference to remarks the Attorney General had made on “Meet the Press,” September 24.





122. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, October 5, 1961.

East-West Relations

Moscowʼs treatment of the conversations between Secretary Rusk and Foreign Minister Gromyko and its general commentary on Berlin suggest that the Soviet leaders are confident formal negotiations will be arranged. Following the third meeting between Secretary Rusk and Foreign Minister Gromyko on 30 September, Pravda on 2 October quoted from a US statement that the sessions were cordial, that they were related to the possibility of East-West negotiations, and that Gromyko was likely to meet with President Kennedy. Soviet press coverage of the first two discussions merely reported that the meetings had been held but gave no indication of the general atmosphere or possible results. The coverage of 2 October, therefore, conveys an impression that the talks are proceeding favorably.

Izvestia also injected a hopeful note in an article which claimed that the Soviet people did not believe that the international situation was entirely covered with the “leaden clouds of war.” A speaker at a public lecture in Moscow on 26 September predicted that the Rusk-Gromyko talks would be followed by negotiations and cited the US-Soviet agreement on disarmament principles as a favorable sign. The East German party organ Neues Deutschland echoed this line in an editorial of 28 September, stating, “Everyone realizes now that there will be negotiations.” Polish party First Secretary Gomulka on 30 September also asserted that “on our side nothing stands in the way of a peaceful solution of the German problem by means of fruitful negotiations and mutual agreements.” The Polish news service reported that “UN circles” expect an East-West foreign ministers conference to be followed by a summit meeting.

This general line suggests that Moscow views the Rusk-Gromyko talks as the opening of a decisive phase in the Berlin crisis. A number of Soviet journalists, in their contacts with American officials, have stressed that the next several weeks will determine the future course for the bloc and have hinted that the Soviet year-end deadline for a solution could be revised if negotiations were in process or scheduled. The third secretary of the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City stated that the USSR was not disposed to sign a separate East German treaty if there were real possibilities for East-West agreement.

A Pravda correspondent claimed that the next six weeks would be most important for setting a date for a meeting at the highest level. He added that the date could be “sometime in 1962” provided the US agreed to the principle of negotiations. A TASS correspondent also emphasized negotiations and warned that if they failed to materialize, Khrushchev would have some “very interesting warnings” at the Soviet party congress.

Communist sources in London were apparently responsible for press reports that the bloc foreign ministers would convene in November to consider the next move on Germany. According to these reports, the bloc would review the results of current East-West contacts, such as the Rusk-Gromyko conversations, and decide whether to proceed with a peace treaty before the end of the year. If no East-West negotiations were arranged by November, the bloc would go ahead as announced and convoke a peace conference, but that if it was clear the West was prepared to negotiate, the Warsaw Pact ministers would recommend postponement of a peace conference until “two or three months” into 1962. Other press reports quoted “Communist diplomats” as saying that the bloc might postpone a separate treaty if the West agreed to negotiate a Berlin settlement.

These semiofficial statements have been accompanied by an official effort to appear responsive to Western views that the agenda of any formal negotiations should be broader than the Soviet proposal of a peace treaty and free-city status for West Berlin. The Soviets have begun to emphasize European security and certain limited partial disarmament measures to show willingness to enlarge the scope of East-West discussions. The Soviets have made it clear, however, that European security discussions are no substitute for a German treaty.

Disarmament

A Soviet Government memorandum submitted to the 16th UN General Assembly1 suggested reaching agreement on freezing military budgets, denouncing the use of nuclear weapons, banning war propaganda, concluding a nonaggression pact between the NATO countries and the Warsaw Pact nations, withdrawing foreign troops from the territories of other countries, taking measures against the further spread of nuclear weapons, creating atom-free zones, and taking steps to lessen the danger of surprise attack.

All of these measures have appeared as provisions of earlier Soviet disarmament proposals, although not necessarily as “partial” disarmament measures. The increase in the number of partial disarmament measures listed may be aimed at countering neutralist dismay over the Soviet position that a test ban solution can be reached “only” through agreement on general and complete disarmament. Several of the measures—a NATO-Warsaw Treaty nonaggression pact, establishment of a nuclear-free zone in Central Europe, withdrawal or at least reduction of foreign troops in Europe, and a ban on supplying nuclear weapons to other countries—are probably calculated to appeal to groups in Western Europe who favor tying European security arrangements to a German settlement.

The memorandumʼs call for reciprocal commitments not to be the first to use nuclear weapons is at variance with a recent statement by Khrushchev. The Soviet leader—who in past years had advocated such an agreement—told New York Times correspondent Sulzberger early in September, “It would be untimely at present to say that in the event of war, atomic weapons would not be employed.” He added that if both sides were to promise not to employ nuclear weapons but retained their stockpiles and the imperialists unleashed a war, “any side” that felt it was losing would “undoubtedly use its nuclear bombs.”

Berlin

Information on Khrushchevʼs discussions with Indonesian Foreign Minister Subandrio on 16 September supplements the line taken by Khrushchev in his talks with Nehru and Belgian Foreign Minister Spaak. Khrushchev stated he was willing to “accommodate” President Kennedy but that he could not infringe on East German sovereignty. He suggested that the access to West Berlin could be guaranteed in separate documents which would be attached to a peace treaty; the documents would be signed by both the German Democratic Republic and the USSR and in this way assuage East German sensibilities.

Bloc leaders continue to stress possible guarantees for future access to West Berlin. Gomulka said on 30 September that the peace treaty will allow a “solution of the West Berlin problem in a way … which will provide it with free communications with the world and international guarantees of the interested powers or guarantees of theUN.” On the same day, Czech President Novotny asserted that if Berlin had become a question of Western prestige, “Let us agree on guarantees for West Berlin, as clearly indicated by Khrushchev.”

[1 paragraph (13 lines of 2-column source text) not declassified]

The blocʼs intention to sign a separate peace treaty by the end of the year continues to be muted in statements and propaganda, although it appears occasionally. Gomulka referred to the deadline in speeches during a visit to Prague; an Izvestia editorial on 29 September mentioned a treaty by the end of the year; and East Germany has continued to stress the deadline. Further information on economic planning to achieve a position to deal with any Western reprisals after conclusion of a separate treaty was contained in an intercepted East German message, which referred to the goal of being “completely free from economic disruption by 1 December 1961.”



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Top Secret; [codeword not declassified]; Noforn. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 1-3 of the Weekly Review section of the issue.

1 Dated September 26. For text, see Documents on Disarmament, 1961, pp. 496-504.





123. Editorial Note


On October 6, 1961, President Kennedy met with Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko for 2 hours at the White House. The latter stated, among other things, that if the United States would not agree to a peace treaty resolving the larger German issues, i.e., borders and nuclear weapons, the USSR would be willing to sign an agreement on Berlin alone. However, in that case the United States would have to agree to resolve the larger issues separately. The President again expressed the U.S. view that Soviet proposals to change the status quo in Berlin did so at the expense of U.S. interests. For text of the memorandum of conversation, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XIV, pages 468-480.





124. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, October 13, 1961.

SUBJECT

US-USSR Educational and Cultural Exchange Agreement



PARTICIPANTS

Boris Nikolaevich Krylov, Chief of the American Section of the USSR State Committee on Cultural Ties With Foreign Countries

Yuri Volsky, Cultural Counselor, Soviet Embassy

Philip H. Coombs, Assistant Secretary of State for Educational and Cultural Affairs

EUR/SES—Ralph A. Jones

CU/PDS—Ernest J. Mansmann

CU/PDS—Ann Eckstein



Mr. Krylov said that he had seen Zhukov who wished him to extend his greetings to Mr. Coombs. Zhukov is concerned about receipt of the U.S. draft of the agreement, as time is now limited. He hopes that our draft will be expedited. The present agreement shows that we started to carry it out only in the second half of 1960 and that we lost at least three months in planning. Mr. Krylov said they want to carry out the new agreements from January 1, 1962.

Mr. Coombs stated that he looks forward to meeting Zhukov. We expect our draft to be ready shortly and want the Soviets to have ample time to study it. We do not want to lose momentum. Romanovsky was here and it was agreed that we are both anxious to continue and expand the number of exchanges.1 Mr. Coombs said that our graduate students have had difficulty in obtaining access to libraries, etc., in the Soviet Union. Our most advanced graduate students are capable of studying in the best institutes in the U.S. The Soviet draft spoke of 50 students a year. Mr. Coombs stated that he was disappointed in this number and hopes to get a larger flow of students in the negotiations. This will benefit both sides. We should not skimp on the number. We also want a balance in the general categories and a balance between the natural sciences on the one hand and the humanities and social sciences on the other hand. We try to maintain such a balance in the U.S. We hope for expansion across the board and for balance. To destroy the myths about each other, we could go further in radio, TV, book and film exchanges. The experience in the performing arts under the present agreement demonstrates this and we should apply it to the other media. We must develop areas of communication immune to day to day difficulties.

Mr. Krylov said that they want to expand exchanges. We now have known each other for four years as far as concrete cultural exchanges go. We know what is more acceptable in each country. He stated that they are ready to speak about cooperation. They are ready and can cooperate in medicine, agriculture, and technical matters. He said that they had provided for 50 students in their draft because the U.S. had fallen below its quota for academic year 1961-62.

Mr. Coombs stated that we can get more students if we can assure them that their research experience will be as useful in the Soviet Union as their experience here. If we can take some of our brilliant young scholars into Soviet institutes and word of this gets back, we can step up the program.

Mr. Krylov said that in principle, there is no objection in the Soviet Union to letting U.S. students into institutes, but an institute in the USSR is like a research center in the U.S. He said that the institutes cannot incorporate U.S. scholars into their own plans. However, in some fields they could let them in.

Mr. Coombs stated that a Soviet student admitted to M.I.T. gets what a Soviet student does in his own university plus what he gets in a Soviet institute. Mr. Coombs wondered if this is a matter of semantics.

Mr. Krylov said that their students find that a subject is not well done in an American university and want to move to another U.S. university. He said that they have over 15,000 foreign students in the USSR who are genuinely satisfied with their programs.

Mr. Coombs said that we are not talking about undergraduates, but rather advanced graduate students from the U.S. to whom you must give the best research conditions.

Mr. Krylov said that we might discuss this; it is not a simple problem but it could be discussed.

Mr. Coombs said that we must work towards six months advance notice of names and groups. Our people cannot wait until the last minute, or we will lose good people, especially in the cultural presentations field.

Mr. Krylov said that he thought that we could work out things based on our experience with the first two agreements. He said that if the U.S. takes two and one-half months to study the Soviet draft, that does not give them two and one-half months to study the U.S. draft if we are to discuss the agreements together in November. He stated that Zhukov said that he will turn the money over for agreements with other countries if the U.S. is not interested in enlarging its contacts. Mr. Krylov said that the European students in the USSR usually stay one to two years, and are advanced students. The Asians stay longer and their background is weaker, yet they are in a hurry to get home.

Mr. Coombs said that as more new countries are opened up, we get more undergraduates in the U.S. He said that we have about 5,000 foreign students in the country under Department auspices. The total number of foreign students in U.S. colleges last year was about 53,000, of which some 10% received some government assistance. Of the 5,000, over half are fully financed by the U.S. Government; the other half received partial assistance from the U.S. Government.

Mr. Krylov stated that the bulk of foreign students in the Soviet Union are under agreements. He said that there are 15,000 foreign students in theUSSR. He added that the expenses of the students at the University of Lumumba are fully covered.

Mr. Coombs said that his job is first, direct responsibility for State Department exchanges and second, coordination and policy-making for all U.S. exchanges. He pointed out that several government departments are involved in exchanges; ICA has about 5,000. HEW and AEC, etc., are concerned with specialized exchanges.

Mr. Krylov said that in the USSR, they have a simpler system—the Committee handles all the exchanges.

The meeting ended with expressions of good wishes on both sides.2



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 511.613/10-1361. Official Use Only. Drafted by Mansmann on November 11.

1 See Document 108.

2 In a telephone conversation with Siscoe on October 18 Secretary Rusk initially suggested that the Soviets be given a U.S. draft exchanges agreement that could be discussed later. After Siscoe said that the Department of State was ready to do this but hesitated lest international developments change the situation, Rusk agreed to wait for the next Soviet move on Berlin in order to emphasize to Moscow that all was not business as usual. (Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192)





125. Editorial Note


In an October 16, 1961, letter to Chairman Khrushchev, President Kennedy raised the issue of Laos, questioning whether a situation as complex as Berlin could be settled peacefully if one much simpler in many ways, such as Laos, could not. “I do not say that the situation in Laos and the neighboring area must be settled before negotiations begin over Germany and Berlin; but certainly it would greatly improve the atmosphere.” Kennedy noted as well that “the acceleration of attacks on South Viet-Nam, many of them from within Laotian territory, are a very grave threat to peace in that area and to the entire kind of world-wide accommodation you and I recognize to be necessary.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VI, pages 38-44.

Kennedy devoted the greater part of his October 16 letter to Berlin and Germany, largely restating U.S. views on the issue, though emphasizing his willingness to look for a pragmatic resolution with which both sides could live. He agreed to have Ambassador Thompson conduct discussions on the issue with Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko. In an October 20 letter to General Norstad, Supreme Commander, Allied Powers Europe, Kennedy laid out U.S. policy on military actions in case of a conflict over Berlin. “What I want is a sequence of graduated responses to Soviet/GDR actions in denial of our rights of access.” Kennedyʼs instructions to Norstad indicated that the United States was ready to escalate to “General Nuclear war” to defend its vital interests in Berlin and Germany. For text, see ibid., volume XIV, pages 520-523.

Following incidents on October 22 and 25 in which U.S. personnel were temporarily refused entry to East Berlin and an incident on October 27 when Soviet tanks took up positions for a day opposite U.S. tanks at Checkpoint Charlie, Secretary of State Rusk instructed Thompson to meet with Gromyko and convey Ruskʼs “surprise and chagrin” at the developments, which Rusk found “incomprehensible in light of our talks with him in the US.” Thompson was further to say to Gromyko that he “must surely understand that serious discussions about Germany and Berlin cannot take place under conditions of duress and increased tension.” For text of Ruskʼs instructions, transmitted in telegram 1165 to Moscow, October 28, see ibid., pages 545-547.





126. Editorial Note


In an October 30, 1961, letter to President Kennedy, Atomic Energy Commission Chairman Seaborg reported that the Commission “as a whole” believed that “in view of the limitations of underground testing and in light of the comprehensive nature of the recent Soviet tests, national security considerations require that the United States embark upon a program of atmospheric testing at the earliest appropriate time.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 210-214.

At a National Security Council meeting called on November 2 to discuss resumption of nuclear testing in the atmosphere, Central Intelligence Agency analyses of recent Soviet tests were presented, indicating that there had been 37 or perhaps 39 tests at 3 sites, the largest detonation possibly exceeding 60 megatons. The tests had impressed the intelligence community with their broad nature. In subsequent discussion, Seaborg stated “that if the US tested only underground while the Soviets tested in the atmosphere, we would be in no position to compete with them.” The President indicated his intention to release a statement to the effect that “no decision has yet been made on testing [in the atmosphere], but that authorization has been given to undertake preparation for testing.” For text of the memorandum of the meeting, see ibid., pages 217-222. For text of the Presidentʼs statement released to the press later the same day, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pages 692-693.





127. Circular Airgram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic PostsSource


Washington, November 8, 1961, 6:17 p.m.

CA-414. The following assessment of the 22nd Congress of the CPSU1 was initially prepared for the presentation to the NATO Council of the United States views on this event. At your discretion, you are authorized to draw on it in discussions with appropriate local officials.

Only time and specific developments will reveal the true significance of this Congress. The following brief analysis is, therefore, only tentative.

1. The general course of the Congress indicated careful advance preparation; Khrushchevʼs dominance in Soviet leadership was readily apparent in the re-endorsement of the basic lines of the 20th Party Congress and in the choice of the focal points for the 22nd Congress. The dominant aspects of the Congress (campaigns against the Stalin era; the anti-party group, Albania and indirectly Communist China; strong reaffirmation of the 20th Congress line; and the lack of emphasis on new Party Program) reflect Khrushchevʼs decision to reassert strongly Moscowʼs primacy in the bloc and the world communist movement.

2. In foreign policy, reaffirmation was given to (a) avoidance of actions entailing a serious risk of nuclear war; (b) endeavors to seek through negotiations with the West agreements favorable to Soviet objectives; (c) assertive Soviet efforts in the underdeveloped areas, and (d) a vigorous “struggle” under “peaceful coexistence” in East-West relations.

3. The moves against Stalinist methods, anti-party group and Albanian leadership were undoubtedly related and have the effect of clarifying Khrushchevʼs personal leadership status. The move to correct the Albanian problem was intended as a thinly veiled challenge to the Chinese Communists within the context of a “domestic” CPSU Congress and Soviet East European considerations (Albania).

4. The open attacks on Stalin and the specific revelations of the brutal acts attributed to his regime have evoked public discussion within the Soviet Union and are likely to result in considerable disorientation and confusion of the Soviet people unless the effects are carefully channeled. These, combined with public discussion in recent years of incompetence and deceptive acts of minor officials, could undermine faith in the Party leadership.

5. The form and method of the Chinese Communist response are still not indicated. One timing factor supporting Khrushchevʼs move may have been Communist Chinaʼs basic internal economic weaknesses at this time. The 22nd Congressʼ developments confirmed earlier indications that the 81 Party Statement of 19603 was a “papering over” effort required by the failure to achieve a real reconciliation of views.

6. The Party Program was obscured by other events at the Congress. Quite aside from Khrushchevʼs desire to focus attention on other matters, this treatment appears consistent with the fact that the Program was not an inspiring document.

7. It is too early to assess the ultimate effects of the changes in the top Party organs, but Khrushchevʼs pre-eminence has not suffered. While it is clear there is opposition to individual Khrushchev policies, there is no evidence of any organized opposition to Khrushchevʼs leadership as such. An action against the anti-party group will, however, serve as a warning to those who might be tempted to go too far in opposing the specific policies of Khrushchev.

8. The reasons for “lifting” the apparent deadline for a separate German treaty were not clear.4 One factor undoubtedly was the apprehension that the USSR and the West were on a collision course. Another factor may well have been the normal evolving of a pre-negotiation position. In any event, the build-up of NATO forces and the firmness of the West on basic principles clearly played an important role. The fact of the existence of discussions with Gromyko afforded Khrushchev the opportunity to lift the deadline without an apparent loss of face.

9. Clearly, Soviet objectives and their determination to achieve those objectives remain undiluted; however, the implications for Western policy as regards intra-bloc and Sino-Soviet ramifications are not fully evident. It is, however, evident that the West must anticipate a continuous application of pressure on sensitive issues and, particularly, must prepare for an increased communist drive in the underdeveloped areas. As regards the Berlin and German problem, there is even a greater need for unity, preparedness and firmness of purpose.



Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 761.001/11-861. Confidential. Drafted by Anderson (SOV) on November 7; cleared by Bohlen, RSB, and CA; and approved by Guthrie. Repeated to Budapest, Bucharest, Moscow, Prague, Sofia, and Warsaw.

1 October 17-31.

3 See footnote 1, Document 16.

4 Khrushchev told the Congress that if the West showed readiness to settle the “German problem,” then “we shall not insist on the peace treaty being signed necessarily before 31 December 1961.” (Current Weekly Intelligence Review, October 20; Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A) Khrushchev wrote Kennedy in a November 9 letter that “in order to create the best possible conditions for the achievement of an agreed settlement the Soviet Government has decided not to insist that the peace treaty be signed by the end of this year.” In the same letter Khrushchev proposed, since the West had taken issue with his earlier proposal to station a token force of Soviet troops in West Berlin when it became a “free city,” that no Four Power forces be stationed there but instead a UN force be introduced to guarantee the status of the city. For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. VI, pp. 45-57.





128. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, November 15, 1961 noon.

1528. Eyes only Secretary. Reference: Deptel 1265.1 Suggest important have agreement Adzhubei either publish entire interview or agreed version.

Believe Soviet public would expect discussion of Berlin problem although this will obviously be delicate to handle.

Believe our support of exchange program should be mentioned and particularly our desire have more Soviet visitors to US.

Our interest in disarmament should be emphasized and see no reason why President should not express our disappointment at Soviet failure agree to test ban and its action in filling atmosphere with radioactive debris.

While debates with Soviets on ideological grounds are generally not productive believe it would be useful emphasize difficulty which Communist ideology places in way of development of friendship and peaceful coexistence between our countries. President might refer to 81 party delegation [declaration?] which stated US imperialism had become enemy of peoples of world. Could also refer to Khrushchevʼs definition of peaceful coexistence with US as “intense economic, political, and ideological struggle” and point out that this could also serve as definition of cold war and hardly basis for real friendship. US believes every country should have system which suits it best and does not pretend that one particular system is bound to prevail throughout world. Communist belief to contrary is source of much friction between us. Believe would be useful for President to state US welcomes increased prosperity of Soviet people and wishes them success in future.

If occasion arises might be useful hit some of most common Soviet misconceptions about US. Soviet people for example unaware magnitude unemployment compensation, role of US regulatory agencies, etc. In referring to peaceful competition between states President could stress role of competition in US and describe our anti-monopoly legislation. Might be useful mention minimum wage and average income, widespread ownership of large corporations, high tax on large incomes, and general evolution capitalist system in US.

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.11-KE/11-1561. Secret; Priority.

1 Telegram 1265, November 13, reported that the President had agreed to be interviewed by Adzhubei and asked Thompson for his views on subjects that would be useful to raise during the interview. (Ibid., 711.11-KE/11-1361) For further background on the origin of the interview, see Salinger, With Kennedy, pp. 199-200.





129. Memorandum From the Secretary of Stateʼs Special Assistant (Bohlen) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source


Washington, November 15, 1961.

Just in case you couldnʼt lay your hand on TOMMYʼs suggestions in regard to the Adzhubei interview, I am enclosing another copy.1 I think TOMMYʼs suggestions are very good, and should be carefully considered. However, while I agree that ideological themes are nonproductive, there is a terrible temptation to have the President go into some of them. But, I imagine that for a President to get into that swamp would probably not be wise.

However, I do agree with TOMMYʼs paragraph on the subject, and I think the President should hit the history of the Soviet Union and the fact that ever since its existence in 1917, it has never had normal relations with any country; the reason being, as TOMMY points out, their adherence to a system which they claim is bound to prevail throughout the world. In this connection, I think he might dwell somewhat on the theme of “peaceful coexistence,” pointing out that its constant repetition by Soviet leaders is curious, since heretofore there had been many different systems of social organization in various countries without the problem of existing side-by-side ever having been raised.

1. Other aspects which the President might treat are those of Stalinʼs actions in foreign affairs which, at this stage, might be capable of discussion. One of these might be the Korean war and, as an offshoot thereof, the Soviet Governmentʼs sponsorship on a world-wide basis of the charge that we had used bacteriological warfare in Korea. This has since been dropped completely by Stalinʼs successors, but it might be worth bringing up as an example of why our relations have been troubled.

2. We should try and think of some news or information which is banned to the Soviet people and this brings us directly to the question of nuclear testing. As you know, while the Soviet intention to test was published in the Soviet press, there was no report on individual explosions and nothing has appeared in the Soviet Union in regard to the fifty megaton one. The President might take the theme that facts are facts, regardless of opinion or ideological coloration, and that to censor everything that goes into a country is hardly a defensible exercise in the modern world.

3. In relation to 2., the President might emphasize the role of secrecy in Soviet international dealings and its destructive effect on the development of any state of confidence with the Soviet Union, quite apart from its obvious denial of elementary freedom.

4. The President might refer to the history of our military posture since the end of the war, dwelling on the complete demobilization of the mightiest force which had ever been assembled until just prior to the Korean war; our military budget was some fourteen billion dollars (I think this is right, but I am not sure) and pointing out as a reply to customary Soviet assertions on United States militarism, that facts and their sequence would demonstrate that our present budget resulted entirely from Soviet actions.

5. The President might dwell on our view of the role and potential usefulness of the United Nations, with special reference to the troika principle, pointing out that this principle was in itself contrary to the purposes of the Charter. He could indulge in a little philosophy here by pointing out that if there is a general denial of objective individuals who could serve as international civil servants, this would reduce the world to a jungle of competing systems, and that what seemed to be at fault here was the absence in Soviet doctrine of any objective morality. Even the most elementary of games requires some rules if they are to be played by people.



The President might, as a closer, state that when the Soviet Union came to realize that Bolshevism was not the system designed for every country and has only been installed by force or conquest, and that as the leaders began to act as the head of a national state, there would then be the first beginnings of a possibility of a reasonable and normal relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union. He might point out, in this connection, that it is not specific United States interests which are being served by our world-wide involvement, but that we are, in effect, a third force, helping weaker countries to resist the efforts of a great power to install its system against the will of the recipients. The President might note, in this connection, that there has never been a case in history where the people of a country have voted in the communist system in any free vote or choice.

I enclose a list of points which were drawn up by the research boys here, which you may find useful.2 I also enclose a copy of Raymond Aronʼs reply to a questionnaire from the Tass agency which Arthur Schlesinger sent over to me, which you will at least find amusing, and possibly useful for this exercise.

I imagine we will be getting together on Monday and Tuesday at some time to go over these various points.

CEB



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, USSR, Adzhubei Interview. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text.

1 Printed as Document 128.

2 Not found.





130. Editorial Note


In a November 16, 1961 letter to Chairman Khrushchev, President Kennedy wrote that the United States viewed the situation in which the Republic of Vietnam found itself “as one seriously endangering international peace and security. Our support of the government of President Ngo Dinh Diem we regard as a serious obligation, and we will undertake such measures as the circumstances appear to warrant.” He asked that Khrushchev, as head of a government that was a signatory to the Geneva Accords, “use all the influence that you possess and endeavor to bring the DRV to the strict observance of these Accords.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VI, pages 61-64.





131. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, November 17, 1961.

East-West Developments

Now that Adenauer has been installed as chancellor in West Germany and the Soviet 22nd party congress has ended, Moscow is stepping up the pace of its diplomatic moves in an effort to induce the West to agree to early negotiations on Berlin and Germany. As part of their effort to create an impression of reasonableness on Berlin, Soviet leaders since the congress have used a wide variety of maneuvers to convey an impression of flexibility in any negotiations. The substance of the Soviet position, however, remains unchanged from the presentation made by Foreign Minister Gromyko in his talks in the United States.

Khrushchev-Kroll Talks

On 9 November, Khrushchev indicated to West German Ambassador Kroll that he could accept in “principle” the ambassadorʼs suggestion for a combination of four-power and bilateral agreements to ensure Berlinʼs viability and free access. Soviet officials then passed to Western journalists in Moscow a four-point plan characterized as a “radical change” in Soviet policy, which included some of Krollʼs suggestions but was more in line with Gromykoʼs approach in the United States.

Khrushchev, who requested the 9 November meeting with Kroll, invited him to exchange opinions informally on Berlin. Kroll put forward a five-point plan: 1) a four-power agreement on a status for West Berlin and free access; 2) a Soviet-East German agreement in which the Ulbricht regime would undertake to respect the four-power accord; 3) agreement on “technical matters” by West Berlin and East Germany, as well as the Western powers; 4) a four-power agreement to establish committees on a German peace treaty and disarmament, with East-West German subcommittees to deal with nonpolitical matters; and 5) an agreement among interested powers to stop “provocative propaganda.”

In his reply, Khrushchev indicated that he could accept this plan “in principle” and countered with three conditions: 1) abolition of the occupation status; 2) termination of any formal legal or political ties between Bonn and West Berlin; and 3) stationing of a “symbolic” Soviet troop contingent in West Berlin to carry out Soviet guarantees.

On this last point Kroll gained the impression that Khrushchev was less than adamant. Earlier indications of possible Soviet flexibility on this point appeared in late September and early October. A Soviet official said on 2 October that the stationing of Soviet troops in West Berlin was not “absolutely required.” According to a British Foreign Office account of the Gromyko-Macmillan talks in London, Gromyko failed to make a “vigorous response” to the prime ministerʼs statement that he failed to “see the logic” of the Soviet demand to station troops in West Berlin. After his talks with Khrushchev in September, Prime Minister Nehru said in a press conference in Tashkent that as a concession the Soviet leader would not insist on the addition of Soviet troops.

The Soviet version of Krollʼs plan immediately conveyed to Western correspondents included the four-power agreement on Berlin and the Soviet-East German agreement, but added the vague formula used by Gromyko in his talks in the US—that the Western powers would undertake “to respect East German sovereignty.” The Soviet version dropped the details of Krollʼs suggestion for four-power committees on a peace treaty and disarmament and merely referred to the conclusion of a peace treaty as the final step. Such exploitation of Krollʼs plan suggests that the Soviet leaders view it as an opportunity to stimulate debate in the West and to increase public pressure for formal negotiations to determine the Soviet bargaining price for agreement.

Khrushchevʼs effort to convince Kroll that negotiations might yield dividends for the West was evident in the premierʼs statement concerning the wall in Berlin, which he claimed was erected on Soviet orders because Ulbricht was too weak to carry out such an important decision. Khrushchev said that the wall could be removed if there were satisfactory agreement on Berlin, but that as long as the “reasons” for the wall existed, it would have to remain. After Kroll noted that Berlin was the old German capital and that Khrushchev should keep this in mind, the Soviet premier said he “agreed” that the feelings of the German people must be respected and that there should be no “victors or losers” in the settlement of the problem.

Khrushchevʼs responses to Krollʼs point—that the better the Berlin settlement, the easier it would be to handle the peace treaty question—gave Kroll the impression that the peace treaty was much more important to the Soviets than the Berlin problem. Khrushchev had told Belgian Foreign Minister Spaak last September that Berlin is “not too important.”

The only point on which Khrushchev became heated in his conversation with Kroll was in reference to the situation at the sector boundary in Berlin. He stated that moving tanks around in Berlin was a “childish” performance and stressed that the West would never induce the Soviets to become “traffic police.” The contrast between Khrushchevʼs pose of flexibility on an over-all Berlin solution and his vehemence on the present situation in Berlin suggests that one purpose of the current campaign of conciliation is to divert attention from the continuing and uncompromising effort to reduce Western rights in Berlin to a minimum.

Moscow reported that Khrushchev received Kroll but said nothing about the details of the conversation. ATASS dispatch reporting on Krollʼs recall to Bonn quoted a Bonn spokesman as saying that Kroll “aired ‘some views’” that were unauthorized by Bonn, without mentioning them, and cited West German commentators who “admit that, under certain circumstances, Krollʼs actions could have moved the negotiations on the German and West Berlin problems off dead center.” TASS portrayed Kroll as a victim of “the atmosphere of mistrust and suspicion within the Western camp” and reported that Bonn is ready to sacrifice him in order to restore Washingtonʼs confidence on the eve of Adenauerʼs visit.

Other Soviet Moves

While the Soviet press has been giving relatively restrained treatment to Berlin developments, a speaker at a public lecture in Moscow on 12 November ridiculed the Western response to the 13 August measures. According to the US Embassy, the speaker said, “All they could do was talk.” When the East Germans instituted controls over Western civilian officials, the US was said to have made a “show of force”; however, the appearance of Soviet tanks exposed the emptiness of the US action, and US acceptance of East German control was said to be confirmed when the US adopted similar controls on 1 November. The speaker claimed that these events show the West is accepting the existence of the German Democratic Republic, and that negotiations will lead to the peaceful resolution of the West Berlin problem.

Two days before Khrushchevʼs conversation with Kroll, Gromyko used his informal conversations with the US, British, and West German ambassadors at a reception to underscore the USSRʼs readiness for four-power negotiations on a Berlin settlement. On the substance of the Berlin and German questions, Gromyko made no mention of a peace treaty and confirmed that the negotiations could be limited to the problems of access to, and the status of, West Berlin.

While insisting on demilitarization of West Berlin and the termination of the occupation status, Gromyko stated that the USSR was prepared to provide the “most formal guarantees” that East Germany would respect an agreement. Gromyko brought up the question of civilian access to Berlin, distinguishing it from military access and claiming that it was not covered by an agreement. He asserted that Bonn had already accepted East German control of West German civilian traffic to Berlin. He was adamant in rejecting any formal link between Bonn and Berlin, but did indicate that present financial and economic ties could be maintained.

According to Kroll, Gromyko told him on 7 November that Soviet Ambassador Smirnov has instructions to meet with Chancellor Adenauer, apparently to resume their mid-August discussion on Berlin. When Smirnov met with Adenauer on 16 August, he maintained that the Soviet Union desired a negotiated settlement on Berlin and would consider any proposals. Adenauer indicated he would continue the discussion after the West German elections. Gromyko said, however, that Smirnov, in renewing his discussions with Adenauer, would definitely not be carrying an invitation for him to visit Moscow.

Soviet Comment on Party Congress

Soviet officials have been seeking to persuade Western representatives that developments at the party congress should be interpreted as a favorable sign for Western interests, particularly in regard to Berlin. Yuriy Zhukov, the chairman of the State Committee for Foreign Cultural Relations, who often claims to have Khrushchevʼs confidence in matters of foreign affairs, told Ambassador Thompson that he hoped President Kennedy was aware of the significance of the party congress as a victory for Khrushchevʼs policy of peaceful co-existence. Earlier, on 25 October, a Soviet Foreign Ministry official claimed that the “anti-party group” had opposed efforts to improve Soviet-American relations and implied that the renewed attacks on the group should therefore be regarded by the West as an encouraging development.

Along this line, Deputy Foreign Minister Kuznetzov told the British ambassador on 7 November that he approved of the interpretation of the party congress given by The Economist on 21 October. This article viewed the withdrawal of the deadline on a German treaty as a respite for the West which should be used to probe Soviet intentions and to determine what a solution of the Berlin problem on a “mutually acceptable basis” means in Soviet terminology. The article also pictured Khrushchev as a “man determined to stick to his set course” and the policies and reforms carried out since Stalinʼs death.

Disarmament and Test Ban Issues

In private conversations with various UN delegates, Soviet delegates have urged agreement to add three neutral countries to the original ten-nation committee for future disarmament negotiations. However, at a 14 November luncheon with US delegates, two Soviet delegates said nothing about a five-five-three forum and repeated the old proposal for a “troika” forum—five Western, five bloc, and five neutral representatives. The US delegation believes that the Soviets returned to the troika in order to re-establish a basic negotiating position. In his 15 November speech opening the UN disarmament debate, Soviet delegate Zorin called for “equal” representation for the bloc, the West, and the neutrals.

A Soviet spokesman told a Canadian delegate that the USSR is anxious to start disarmament negotiations “early next year.” The spokesman also said that the USSR has detected growing reluctance on the part of the US to begin disarmament talks and presumes the reason is that the US believes such talks would be interpreted as a sign of weakness on Berlin. Soviet delegates have also expressed willingness to conduct further bilateral talks with the US, particularly on the question of a new disarmament forum.

There has been no Soviet response to the US-British notes of 13 November1 urging a resumption of the Geneva test ban talks later this month. The sharp attack by Soviet delegate Tsarapkin on the Anglo-American UN resolution calling for a resumption of negotiations on a test ban treaty and the bloc vote against the resolution makes it clear that the USSR will reject the US-British offer and continue to insist that the nuclear test question be considered only in the context of general and complete disarmament.



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Secret; No Further Dissemination. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 1-4 of the Weekly Review section of the issue.

1 For text of the U.S. note, see Documents on Disarmament, 1961, p. 594.





132. Editorial Note


On November 21, 1961, the intelligence community issued Special National Intelligence Estimate 11-14-61, “The Soviet Strategic Military Posture, 1961-1967.” The estimate sought to “reassess the broad outlines of theUSSRʼs military doctrine and posture in the light of recent information on Soviet strategic thinking, present military capabilities, and R&D in major weapons systems, and to estimate future trends in Soviet military strategy and force structure.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VIII, pages 198-209.





133. Editorial Note


In a November 22, 1961, memorandum to Secretary of State Rusk, Arthur Dean reported that earlier that day the President had called him and expressed concern that “public opinion might believe that we did not have complete freedom of action to test in all environments while negotiations were going on in Geneva. He suggested that I should make this absolutely clear at the opening of negotiations.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 235-236. In the course of his opening statement to the conference on November 28, Dean emphasized that because of the Soviet Unionʼs “unwarranted attempt to gain for itself a unilateral advantage in the nuclear field,” there was “naturally no chance whatsoever—and I want to make this very clear—of any pre-treaty commitment by the United States not to conduct any nuclear tests of any character in any environment which it deems essential for the national security of itself and its associates.” For text of Deanʼs statement, see Documents on Disarmament, 1961, pages 665-673.

In a letter to President Kennedy, November 22, Glenn Seaborg, Chairman of the NSC Committee on Atmospheric Testing Policy, stated that for a major portion of nuclear weapons technology, above-ground testing was “essential to any substantial future progress” and that urgency had been “added to the need for progress by the substantial advances made by the USSR.” He recommended implementation of a program to consist of a minimum of 27 test shots in the atmosphere over a period of approximately 3 months beginning in the spring of 1962. In National Security Action Memorandum 116, December 1, the President approved Seaborgʼs list of 27 atmospheric tests “for the purpose of proceeding with preparations,” subject to several provisos, including a review of the list “with a view to reduction in the numbers of atmospheric tests, in the length of time of the test series, and in the resulting radioactive fall-out.” The President also “reserved judgment on the final decision for or against resumption of atmospheric testing.” For text of Seaborgʼs letter and NSAM 116, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 241-248 and 252-253.





134. Transcript of an Interview Between President Kennedy and the Editor of Izvestia (Adzhubei)Source


Hyannis Port, November 25, 1961, 10:20 a.m.

Mr. Adzhubei: Mr. President, I am happy to get this interview from you, and I would like to tell you quite frankly that your election to the high post of President of the United States office was met with great hope by public opinion in our country. In connection with this, I would like to ask you the following question—

The President. May I just say that I appreciate very much your coming to the United States. I also appreciate the opportunity to talk, through you and through your newspaper, to the people of the Soviet Union. I think that communication, an exchange of views, an honest report of what our countries are like and what they want and what the people wish, is in the interests of both our countries and in the interests of peace. So we are delighted to have this opportunity.

Mr. Adzhubei: I would like to ask you the following question. Mr. President, during the election campaign, on several occasions you expressed good intentions with respect to the necessity of improving Soviet-American relations. On the occasion of your Inauguration as President of a great country, Nikita Khrushchev, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR, and Leonid Brezhnev, Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, in their message to you1 expressed the hope that by their joint efforts our countries can succeed in radically improving our relations and the international situation. They also expressed confidence that we can, step by step, liquidate the existing suspicion and distrust, and thus bring cooperation between our peoples. On its part, the Soviet government is always ready to support any good endeavor in that direction, and to do its best for the establishment of a stable peace in the world, in order that all peoples may live in friendship and without hatred among them.

Mr. President, what do you think about the present state of Soviet-American relations, and what in your opinion must be done by the American as well as the Soviet governments to improve the relations between our two countries?

The President. Well, I would say that the relations today are not as satisfactory as I had hoped they would be when I first took office. In fact, one of the first things that I did on becoming President was to commit the United States to an earnest effort to achieve a satisfactory agreement with the Soviet Union on the cessation of nuclear tests. As a result of that effort, at the end of March, we sent our representatives, along with Great Britainʼs, to Geneva for the first time with a complete treaty which we tabled for discussion.2 I had hoped that this would be one area where we could make real progress. It would lessen the contamination of the air, it would be a first step towards disarmament, and I felt that if we could achieve an agreement in this area, we could then move on to the other areas of disarmament which required action.

We were not successful. And, as you know, we were in fact still at the table in Geneva in August when, still negotiating, the Soviet Union resumed its tests which must have been in preparation for many months, at the very time that the conversations were going on. So that has been a disappointment.

In addition, Berlin and Germany have become, I think, areas of heightened crisis since the Vienna meeting, and I think extremely dangerous to the peace, which I am sure—I know—both of our people want.

I think that the Soviet Union and the United States should live together in peace. We are large countries, energetic people, we are steadily providing in both our countries an increase in the standard of living. If we can keep the peace for 20 years, the life of the people of the Soviet Union and the life of the people of the United States will be far richer and will be far happier as the standard of living steadily rises.

Where we feel the difficulty comes is the effort by the Soviet Union to communize, in a sense, the entire world. If the Soviet Union were merely seeking to protect its own national interests, to protect its own national security, and would permit other countries to live as they wish—to live in peace—then I believe that the problems which now cause so much tension would fade away.

We want the people of the Soviet Union to live in peace—we want the same for our own people. It is this effort to push outward the communist system, on to country after country, that represents, I think, the great threat to peace. If the Soviet Union looked only to its national interest and to providing a better life for its people under conditions of peace, I think there would be nothing that would disturb the relations between the Soviet Union and the United States.

Mr. Adzhubei: That is very interesting. However, as a citizen of the Soviet Union, as a member of the Communist Party, I cannot agree with you, in that part of your answer where you are saying that we are trying to “communize” the world. At the 22nd Party Congress, which, in our opinion, was an historic event, we adopted a program of communist development and we said that we are against any export of revolution, but we are also against any export of counter-revolution. If we turn to facts, there are many countries in the world in the affairs of which, from our point of view the United States is interfering. Yesterday, I saw a TV program which was being shown to millions of Americans, where your commentator asserted that the whole world is under complete threat of the communists to capture the world. We would like to see an end put to this situation.

Our government and our party believe that every people chooses such a system of government as they like. Austria chose the capitalist way of development, although American and Soviet troops were there. But Cuba has chosen another way of development. And we would be happy if you, Mr. President, were to state that the interference in the affairs of Cuba was a mistake. We hope that the Cuban people will consolidate their own way of life—as well as the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Brazil, and many other countries.

The President. May I just say, without getting into a debate, that the United States supports the idea that every people shall have the right to make a free choice as to the kind of government they want. In the case of Cuba, let me remind you that the Castro revolution was originally supported by the great majority of the people. When Castro was leading the revolution, the statement was made that there would be free elections, and freedom for the people, and progress for the people. But Castro has not kept that commitment. Until the present government of Cuba will allow free and honest elections, in our opinion, it cannot claim to represent the majority of the people. That is our dispute with Cuba.

Mr. Jagan, on the other hand, who was recently elected Prime Minister in British Guiana is a Marxist, but the United States doesnʼt object—because that choice was made by an honest election, which he won.

If the people of any country choose to follow a communist system in a free election, after a fair opportunity for a number of views to be presented, the United States would accept that. What we find to be objectionable, and a threat to the peace, is when a system is imposed by a small militant group by subversion, infiltration, and all the rest.

If the Soviet Union and this country could develop their own resources, and if you permitted the peoples of the world to develop in the way they wish to develop, then, if any nation should choose a communist system, we would recognize and accept that. And if they chose another system, then we would hope that you would recognize and accept that, too. If we could get that on both sides, I believe the Soviet Union and the United States, which have so much to gain from peace, could live in peace.

Mr. Adzhubei: I understand you, Mr. President, and I am very happy to hear these words from you, because as you know, the future of the world depends in many respects on the relations between the United States and our country. Let the people decide what way of development they want to choose. However I would like to draw your attention to the following historical parallel. When the Bolsheviks, headed by V.I. Lenin, came to power, all the capitalist world was shouting that they were plotters and that there was no freedom in Russia but in 44 years our country became a great power. But this is not the issue. I would like to ask you another question—

The President. You are a newspaper man and a politician.

Mr. Adzhubei: In our country every citizen is a politician, because we like our country very much. The young and the old like the socialist system of our country and we are ready to fight for it until its victorious end. You are proud of your country, Mr. President, and we are also very much proud of our own country, and we are very proud of our party, and we are proud of V.I. Lenin.

Mr. President, sometimes itʼs said that in order to improve the relations between our countries, it is necessary to start with the settlement of small problems. Others believe that too many small issues have accumulated and that perhaps it would be better to start with a big act. We believe that such a big act was the visit by Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev to the United States in 1959. But unfortunately the results of that trip were not completely satisfactory.3 Mr. President, what is your attitude toward the idea of concluding a pact of peace between the United States and the Soviet Union? That would be a great step forward.

The President. I think we should have not only an agreement between our countries, but take those steps which make peace possible. I donʼt think that paper, and words on paper, are as significant as looking at those areas which provide tension between our two systems and seeing if we can dispel that tension.

One of those areas now is the problem of Germany and Berlin. If we could make progress there, then in my opinion it would provide a most important step in improving our relations in other areas.

I stated that if we had been able to get an agreement on the nuclear tests cession, that would lead to other agreements on disarmament. If we can make an agreement successfully which provides peace in Central Europe, if we can conclude our efforts in Laos and insure a government and a country which are neutral and independent, as Chairman Khrushchev and I agreed at Vienna, then we would be able to move into other areas of tension. I believe, as I have said, if we can now make an agreement on a satisfactory basis on Berlin and Germany, which is the most critical area—because it represents a matter of great interest to both our countries, and great concern to our peoples—then we could take other steps. If we can solve the problem of Germany and Berlin, I believe we can find our relations substantially improved.

Mr. Adzhubei: Thank you, Mr. President, this is a most worthy thought. Especially because, as I understand you, you intend to talk seriously on these problems with our government. Let me say that the German problem is of great importance to our country, for many reasons. Not only for strictly political reasons, and not only because of prestige considerations. As you know we have allies—Poland, Czechoslovakia, and a number of other countries. However, to date we havenʼt heard any sober voices from the West affirming the integrity of the borders existing in Europe and it would be very important to hear that. But there is also another aspect to the German problem. In our country, in the Soviet Union, there is not a single family that did not lose some kin in the war. You know we are trying to put out the smouldering coals of the last war in Central Europe. But we do not wish only to play the role of a political fireman, as it were, though it is very important. In the heart of every Soviet citizen, in the soul of every Soviet citizen, there are, as you know, coals still burning from the last war and they are burning his soul and does not let him sleep quietly. Thus, solution of the question of a peace treaty is the hope and tranquillity in the heart of every Soviet man. After all we are still singing songs about those who did not come home from the war. I know that you participated in the war, that you are a hero of the war, and this is why I am talking to you in such lofty words. But this, if you wish, is a side-line.

Mr. President, in 1958, if I am not mistaken, our government suggested to the government of the United States—of course, the previous administration was in power then—that the trade relations between our countries be normalized. Now, as you know, the trade relations between our countries are in a very lamentable condition. Before I left for the United States, I had a conversation with my friends from the Ministry of Foreign Trade, and they asked me to inquire with you whether there are any prospects of improving the trade relations between our countries. After all there is a very old truth: together with goods, together with the exchange of goods, there also come better relations among peoples.

The President. Let me say that I know that the Soviet Union suffered more from World War II than any country. It represented a terrible blow, and the casualties affected every family, including many of the families of those now in government.

I will say that the United States also suffered, though not so heavily as the Soviet Union, quite obviously. My brother was killed in Europe. My sisterʼs husband was killed in Europe.

The point is that that war is now over. We want to prevent another war arising out of Germany. I think the important thing between the United States and the USSR is not to create the kind of tension and pressure, which in the name of settling World War II increases the chances of a conflict between the Soviet Union and its allies on the one hand and the United States and its allies on the other. What we should attempt to do is work out a solution through negotiation which will make it possible to keep the peace in Central Europe. And that is the aim of this government.

Now in regard to trade, one of the first things I did on becoming President was to change governmental policy which provided for the admission of crab meat. This was not a matter of great dollar value, but had some symbolic importance, and was a matter which Chairman Khrushchev had spoken about on several occasions.

My own judgment is that, if we can solve the problems that we are now talking about, particularly in Berlin, and ease the general tension, trade will then increase. What has diminished trade in recent months has been the difficulty which we have experienced in Germany and Berlin. I would hope that trade could be expanded, and in my judgment it would expand immediately, if we can bring about a peaceful and satisfactory solution to the interests of all in Germany and Berlin.

Mr. Adzhubei: I shall communicate your words to our readers with a feeling of satisfaction. We have always thought and still think of the Americans as the realists. It is your energy, your realistic approach, that has helped you to create such a wealthy country. But now I would like to ask you frankly, Mr. President, because this idea was expressed by you in several instances, whether you seriously think that the social changes which are happening in the world today are the result of actions in which Moscow has its hands? I would like to remind you of one thing. You know, in France when the bourgeois revolution won, the aristocratic Europe accused France of every mortal sin. When the October revolution won, all the world of the rich condemned that revolution. But this revolution won! You mentioned that a Marxist came to power in British Guiana. Do you think that events occurred there according to our instructions? Of course, we canʼt give you any assurances that there wonʼt be social changes in the world, although you will call it the result of the “hands” in Moscow.

The President. Let me say, as I indicated, if the people of these countries make a free choice, that they prefer the communist or socialist or any other kind of system, then the United States and the people of the United States accept that. That is why I gave the example of British Guiana. But of course I do not hold and I do not say that the Soviet Union is responsible for all the changes that are coming in the world. For example, since the end of World War II, the British Empire has been turned into independent states, I think 15 of them. The French community has been turned into 21 independent states. There are many changes in the world. Western Europe has joined closer together in the Common Market. These are not the result of the communistsʼ efforts. There are many changes, as I have said, throughout the world. People want to live in different ways. That is what we want, also. If they have a fair opportunity to make a choice, if they choose to support communism, we accept that. What we object to is the attempt to impose communism by force, or a situation where once a people may have fallen under communism the communists do not give them a fair opportunity to make another choice.

We had been under the impression that the Yalta Agreement and the Potsdam Agreement provided for a free choice for the peoples of Eastern Europe. They do not, in our opinion, today have a free choice. You may argue that they may want to live under communism, but if they do not they are not given the opportunity to change.

We believe that if the Soviet Union—without attempting to impose the communist system—will permit the people of the world to live as they wish to live, relations between the Soviet Union and the United States will then be very satisfactory, and our two peoples, which now live in danger, will be able to live in peace and with a greatly increased standard of living. And I believe we have such vast economic opportunities now in both of our countries that we should consider how we can get along, and not attempt to impose our views, one on the other or on anyone else.

Mr. Adzhubei: Of course, Mr. President, I did not expect in such a short period of time I would succeed in converting you to another belief—just as you did not expect to convert me. You have talked with our Chairman, the First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and he did not succeed in convincing you, nor did he try to do so. This, as you know, is a matter of personal outlook. One man may consider certain elections to be free, while another would consider those elections non-democratic. For example, in a number of countries of Latin America, great revolutionary changes are taking place. For a long period of time you considered that Trujillo4 was elected in a democratic way. You have been saying the same about the regime of the Shah of Iran as well. But let us not engage in an argument and let us turn to the next question.

Mr. President, may I ask you the following question? It is well known that the Soviet government has declared its readiness to accept any proposal of the Western powers on international control and inspection, if agreement on general and complete disarmament is reached. At the same time, the Soviet government does not exclude the possibility of reaching agreement on a number of measures which may decrease the danger of war and which could be effected in the nearest future. Such proposals are, for instance, the proposals on the freezing of military budgets, renunciation of the use of nuclear weapons, the conclusion of a non-aggression pact between NATO and the Warsaw Pact countries, withdrawal of foreign troops from the territories of other countries, the establishment of a nuclear free zone, or measures against the danger of surprise attack. What, in your views, are the prospects of general and complete disarmament, and of decreasing international tensions?

The President. Inasmuch as the Soviet Union and the United States agreed in the declaration of principles in September,5 at the end of the McCloy-Zorin talks, on the goal of general and complete disarmament, the problem now becomes an attempt to implement that goal, stage by stage. The Soviet Union and the United States have a basic disagreement which must be resolved on this question. We believe that there must be adequate inspection, to make sure that each side is disarming and staying in accordance with the agreements which they make. The Soviet Union has stated that it will permit us, or the international body, to inspect those weapons which are destroyed but will not permit us to carry out an inspection to see what weapons remain. One side could destroy a hundred bombers but still have a thousand or two thousand bombers left. If you are really going to provide for orderly disarmament, it seems to me you have to inspect not only those weapons which have been destroyed, but also those weapons that remain. Otherwise we do not have any guarantee of security for either side. If we can agree to an effective inspection system so that each country can know that the other is living up to its agreement, then, in my opinion, we can move into general and complete disarmament.

That is why I thought it so vitally important that we make an agreement on cessation of nuclear testing as the first step, and then proceed step by step through atomic weapons, through missiles, through the level of ground forces, the Navy, and all the rest. If we can get agreement on that, then we can move toward general and complete disarmament.

I think it would be helpful if NATO and the Warsaw pact engaged in a commitment to live in peace with each other, I certainly believe we should take every conceivable step to prevent surprise attack. I believe that if the relations between our countries can be normalized, there will be less military buildup on both sides, but we cannot now withdraw our troops from Europe, way back across the Atlantic Ocean, when you merely withdraw your troops to the Soviet Union which is only a few hundred miles away. This is why we need some understanding of what is going to be the situation in Berlin and in Germany. And that is why I hope negotiations will take place between our governments quickly and will come to a successful conclusion.

The statement has been made on many occasions that we object to the signing of a peace treaty, that we regard that as a belligerent act. That is not the point. It is our view that the statement which the four powers made at Geneva in 1955 providing for the reunification of Germany represents the soundest policy.6 To divide a country, to divide a city, to put up a wall in a city, we believe, only increases tensions rather than diminish them. And we believe that, if the German people were permitted to be reunified, adequate steps could be taken to protect the security of all involved.

Now we recognize that today the Soviet Union does not intend to permit reunification, and that as long as the Soviet Union has that policy, Germany will not be reunified. The question now is whether the Soviet Union will sign a treaty with the East German authorities which will increase tension rather than diminish it. As I said in my speech at the United Nations,7 we recognize that the Soviet Union can sign any treaty it wishes with the East German authorities. What we find to be so dangerous, however, is the claim that that treaty will deny us our rights in West Berlin, rights which we won through the war, rights which were agreed to by the Soviet Union, the United States, Britain, and France at the conclusion of the war, and which we believe should be continued. But if you sign a treaty with East Germany and those rights are subject to the wishes of the East German authorities, it seems to me that that is going to increase tension. If the Soviet Union attempts in that treaty to turn over jurisdiction over West Berlin to the East German authorities, against the wishes of the people of West Berlin—if the lines of communication and access, from West Berlin to the outside world and the West, are completely under the control of East German authorities to cut any time they so wish—then this treaty does not bring peace, it only increases the danger.

Now I am hopeful that, in the conversations and negotiations which we hope to have with the Soviet Union, assurances will be given which will permit us to continue to exercise the rights which we now have in West Berlin, as a result of the existing four power agreement, and will permit free access in and out of the city. We do not want to stay in West Berlin if the people there do not want us to stay. But they want us to stay. When they decide that they donʼt want us, we will leave. But as long as they wish us to stay, it seems to me that the rights which are ours by agreement should be maintained. I am hopeful that the Soviet Union will agree with this, and in particular will agree to permit supplies and people to move in and out of West Berlin freely. Then we can, in my opinion, reach a peaceful settlement in the center of Europe, and if we can reach an agreement on this question, then I believe our relations will greatly improve.

Mr. Adzhubei: You just answered the question I was going to ask. But I cannot agree with you. I am not a specialist in the field of disarmament, but as I understand it, the McCloy-Zorin agreement was a very important step forward, and we hope that the efforts by specialists who will be authorized by our governments will lead to better results. And now a few words about Germany. If I understood correctly the translation, I have heard a very unrealistic term. I have in mind the term “East German authorities.” It would be more pleasant to hear “government of the German Democratic Republic.” You donʼt like the German Democratic Republic. We donʼt like the Federal Republic of Germany, but we have diplomatic relations with theFRG, we have very good trade relations with it. Thus, we are realists. If the government of the United States were not saying “East German authorities” but were to say “government of theGDR,” that would be very good and realistic.

And now a second point. We would like to sign a peace treaty together with our World War II allies, and we hope that it will be so. It would be a great happiness not only for our government but also for our people. Nobody intends to turn West Berlin over to East Germany. That does not make sense. There is the GDR and there is the FRG with its capitalist system. Letʼs sign a peace treaty and let us guarantee freedom for West Berlin by every means—by troops of the four powers, by United Nations troops—and letʼs thus guarantee its rights. But this is a problem for future negotiation. Now a few words about access to West Berlin. Why complicate such a simple problem? Communication to West Berlin runs over 100 miles through the territory of the German Democratic Republic. If one needs to visit West Berlin, if it is necessary to send people, food or other goods there, then it is very elementary to ask permission for that of the government of the GDR. Sometimes I feel—and I am saying this to you very frankly—that some evil people are attempting to complicate simple things and thus are deliberately creating tension. Yesterday, when I was talking with your closest advisers, I gave this example: if a man has his nervous system extremely strained, he is irritated by every noise, every sound and everything is taken by him very suspiciously. Such a man can create much trouble. We hope that the negotiations which will take place in the near future will be objective, realistic, and will be conducted in an atmosphere of complete calm.

The President. May I just make one brief response? All Berlin was put under four-power authority by the agreements at Potsdam. East Berlin, which was under the immediate authority of the Soviet Union, has now been turned over to East Germany in violation of those agreements. It is no longer effectively under four-power control. And now the Soviet Union seeks to place Soviet troops in West Berlin. It does not suggest that the troops of the other three powers be placed in East Berlin. In other words, the Soviet Union now seeks to share in the control of West Berlin. That is the first point that is in question. The second is this question of the rights of access in crossing East Germany. As I gather it, you would give the East German authorities—you say East German government—the power to interfere with that traffic. It is stated that they would not do so, but we have no assurances in Mr. Ulbrichtʼs statements which vary from week to week. In my opinion, if such an agreement is signed, if our rights on the communication lines between the West and West Berlin—which are now governed by the Soviet Union—are turned over the East German authorities, and if the East Germans should interfere with that right of access, for one reason or another, then this would provide for heightened tension, the Soviet Union might come to the support of East Germany and we would find ourselves, instead of having settled this now, once more face to face.

The reason why we have been reluctant to recognize East Germany as a sovereign power is that we do not recognize the division of Germany. In our opinion the German people wish to have one united country. If the Soviet Union had lost the war, the Soviet people themselves would object to a line being drawn through Moscow and the entire country. If we had been defeated in war, we wouldnʼt like to have a line drawn down the Mississippi River. The Germans want to be united. I think it should be possible to provide for that under conditions which will protect the interests of all concerned. But the Soviet Union believes that it is more in their interest to keep Germany divided.

Now the question is—given that decision—can we provide for the protection of our rights in West Berlin, which were agreed to in 1945 by the Soviet Union, so that this is not a continuing crisis? In attempting to work out a solution of the problems which came about as a result of World War II, we donʼt want to increase the chances of World War III. All we wish to do is maintain a very limited—and they are a very limited number of troops of the three powers in West Berlin and to have, for example, an international administration on the Autobahn so that goods and people can move freely in and out. Then we can have peace in this area for years. But if East Germany is going to exercise the right of authority over that access, we are going to have continued tension there—and I simply do not see, given the strong interests of both of us in having peace in this part of Europe, why that is a wise decision. I am hopeful instead that the negotiations which we are anxious to see take place will bring about an agreement on this area which will recognize fairly the interests of all.

Mr. Adzhubei: Mr. President, since I'm talking to you in a very frank and friendly manner, I would like to ask you to imagine, at least for a moment, the following impossible thing. Imagine that you were an officer, a veteran of the Soviet Navy, who fought in World War II. You won the war, and then the very events occurred which are now taking place. One of the parts of Germany—the Federal Republic of Germany—does not recognize the borders which have been established after the war. It is again building up its armed forces. The Chancellor of that country goes to the United States to talk to the President of the United States and they have secret talks. The spirit of revanchism is very high in that part of Germany. What would your attitude be toward this, if you were a veteran of the Soviet Navy?

The President. If I were a Soviet veteran, I would see that West Germany now has only nine divisions, which is a fraction of the Soviet forces. Nine divisions. It has no nuclear weapons of its own. It has a very small Air Force—almost no Navy, I think perhaps two or three submarines. So it is not a military threat. Its nine divisions are under the international control ofNATO, and subject to the command of theNATO organization, which is made up of 15 countries of Europe which altogether have, in West Germany now, about 22 or 23 divisions—about the same number as the Soviet divisions in East Germany. So that I do not see that this country represents a military threat now to the Soviet Union, even though I recognize how bitter was the struggle in World War II—in the same way that Japan today represents no threat to the United States, even though 20 years ago there were 4 years of war in the Pacific against the Japanese. The power of countries changes—weapons change—science changes—without missiles, without nuclear capability, with very few divisions today, I donʼt believe West Germany is a military threat.

Then I would look at the power of the United States, and I would look at the power of the Soviet Union, and I would say that the important thing is for the Soviet Union and the United States not to get into a war, which would destroy both of our systems. So as a Soviet veteran, I would want the Soviet Union to reach an agreement with the United States which recognizes the interests and the commitments of the United States, as well as our own, and not attempt to enforce single-handedly a new situation upon the United States which would be against previous commitments we had made. The Soviet Union made a commitment in regard to Berlin in 1945. Germany today is divided. Germany today is not a threat to the Soviet Union militarily.

The important thing is to attempt to reach an accord which recognizes the interests of all; and I believe that can be done with respect to Germany. I recognize that there are going to be two Germanies as long as the Soviet Union believes that that is in her interest. The problem now is to make sure that, in any treaty which the Soviet Union reaches with East Germany, the rights of the other powers are recognized in Berlin. Thatʼs all we're talking about. We are not talking about encouraging revanchism, building a great German military machine, or anything else you mention. In any peace treaty which is signed with East Germany, there must be a recognition of the rights of the United States and the other powers.

Now that does not seem to me to be a threat in any way to the security of the Soviet Union. That does not provide for any increase in the Western military forces, which are rather limited there. I think we could have peace in this century in Central Europe if we can reach an accord over West Berlin. To pursue another course in the name of ending World War II—a course which threatens to increase the chance of World War III—represents a wholly unwise policy, for you and for us.

So, if I were a Soviet officer and wanted peace, I would think peace can be won and my countryʼs security can be assured. The Soviet Union is a strong military power. It has great nuclear capacity. It has missiles, planes—it has a great number of divisions—it has countries associated with it. No one is ever going to invade the Soviet Union again. There is no military power that can do that. The problem is to make an agreement which will permit us to have our interests recognized, as well as yours. That should not be beyond the capacity of us both.

Chairman Khrushchev did not, nor did I, make the arrangements in 1945 in regard to Berlin. Our responsibility, given the situation which is a difficult one, is to bring about peace, and I believe it can be done.

In short, if I were a Soviet naval officer, I would feel that the security of the Soviet Union was well protected, and that the important thing now is to reach an accord with the United States, our ally during that second war.

Mr. Adzhubei: Mr. President, I am about to finish. Of course, you answered this question not as a veteran of the Soviet armed forces but as President of the United States, and that is quite natural. However, as I understand you, Mr. President, you are against West Germanyʼs having nuclear weapons at her disposal, or in any degree of control over such weapons?

The President. The United States, as a matter of national policy, as I said at the United Nations, will not give nuclear weapons to any country, and I would be extremely reluctant to see West Germany acquire a nuclear capacity of its own. Chancellor Adenauer stated that they would not, in 1954.8 That is still the policy of that government, and I think that is the wise policy.

Mr. Adzhubei: But you know perfectly well that many top posts in NATO are occupied by German generals, and you know that Europe is very far from the United States. Donʼt you think that at some point it might happen that German generals might become too influential in NATO?

The President. That is why I believe it to be so important to stress the West German army is integrated in NATO. NATO is now commanded by an American; and, in my judgment, as long as German forces are integrated in NATO—and NATO is under the control of the 15 NATO countries, none of which wants another war—there is security for all. And I think that will continue.

Now if this situation changed, if Germany developed an atomic capability of its own, if it developed many missiles, or a strong national army that threatened war, then I would understand your concern, and I would share it. After all, we have had two wars in Europe, as well as you. But the situation today, and the situation for the future, is as I have described it. If it changed, then it would seem to me appropriate for the United States and the Soviet Union and others to consider the situation at that time. But it is not that way now, so why take the risk of having the United States, which is a powerful country, and the Soviet Union, which is also powerful, getting into difficulty with each other, when there is no real threat in Europe to you or to us. I think that we should look at things as they are in 1961.

You have stated that you are realists. This is not 1939, 1940, or 1941. Look what has happened. As I said, in the Far East, Japanʼs strength was entirely different in those years. Chinaʼs power was also entirely different. Countries change. Situations change. And we have to be realistic enough to see where the real danger lies. The real danger today is the fact that both of us possess in our nuclear stockpiles the means to impose great devastation upon each other—and we are the ones that have the most to lose from war.

Therefore I think, if we look at it realistically, we should be able to reach an accord which protects the interests of our two great countries, and permits us both to go ahead with increasing our standard of living and meeting other problems. In the United States in the last 14 years our living standard has increased 40 percent. In the Soviet Union it has gone up sharply. Nobody can benefit more from peace than the Soviet Union and the United States.

I would hope that rather than attempting to talk about conditions in Germany as they were 20 years ago, we would look at them as they are today. We have had peace, really, in Europe for 15 years. The problem now is to see if we can reach a negotiation which can settle this matter for another 15 years. Nobody knows what is going to happen in the world over the long run, but at least we ought to be able to settle this matter of Berlin and Germany.

Mr. Adzhubei: I thank you for your attention and this time that I took from your weekend rest.

The President. I appreciate very much your giving me, as President, this opportunity to talk to the people of the Soviet Union, and your courtesy in coming here. I want to emphasize that to the people of this country there is nothing that would satisfy them more than to see the two countries live at peace, and the people of the two countries enjoying a steadily increasing standard of living. I was in the Soviet Union as a student in 1939, and I understand that there have been many changes, and that the standard of living of the people is rising. The standards of the people of the United States have also risen. I am hopeful that this interview will contribute in some degree to better understanding and to peace. For, I repeat again, our two peoples have the most to gain from peace.

Mr. Adzhubei: Thank you Mr. President.



* * *



* Source: Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 741-752. The meeting was held in the living room of the Presidentʼs residence. The text was transcribed by the official White House reporter, Jack Romagna, translated into Russian by Akalovsky and Bolshakov, and then retranslated into English by Akalovsky for release to the press. Other than the difference noted in footnote 3, the Russian text published in Izvestia on November 28 is the same as the source text. Salinger was also present at the interview.

1 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. VI, p. 2.

2 For text of this March 21 draft, see Documents on Disarmament, 1961, pp. 55-65.

3 This sentence, as published in Izvestia, reads: “But the positive results of that trip were wrecked and brought to nothing by the well-known actions of the then American administration”. [Footnote in the source text.]

4 Generalissimo Rafael L. Trujillo y Molina, Commander in Chief of the Dominican Armed Forces.

5 For text of the agreed principles for disarmament negotiations, September 20, see Documents on Disarmament, 1961, pp. 439-442, or U.N. doc. A/4879, September 20, 1961.

6 For text of this Four-Power Directive, July 23, 1955, see Foreign Relations, 1955-1957, vol. V, pp. 527-528.

7 For text of the Presidentʼs address to the U.N. General Assembly, September 25, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 618-626.

8 For text of Protocol III to the Brussels Treaty, October 22, 1954, in which Adenauer made this undertaking, see Foreign Relations, 1952-1954, vol. V, Part 2, pp. 1446-1451.





135. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Press Secretary (Salinger) to Secretary of State RuskSource


Washington, November 28, 1961.

I would appreciate your comments on the following draft letter to Alexsei Adzhubei, Editor of Izvestia:

“Dear Alexsei:

“We were all most pleased with the publication of the Presidentʼs interview in Izvestia. As I told you when you were here, I considered the opportunity for an American President to express his views to the Soviet people of the greatest possible importance and your faithful publication of the Presidentʼs views has fully met our expectations in this matter.

“As you said in the interview, it is sometimes better to ‘begin with small things.’ The interview, in my opinion, was a ‘big thing’ but there are other matters relating to free communication between our two countries which, in my mind, can be improved.

“As you will recall during our first meeting last June, we spent some time on the problem of the restrictions on American and Soviet newsmen in our respective countries. I do not believe these restrictions to be in the interest of either the United States or the Soviet Union. We discussed the same subject again last week in Hyannis and you expressed the belief that should the United States decide to lift its restrictions on Soviet newsmen, the Soviet Union would do likewise with regard to American newsmen. I refer specifically to the travel restrictions which have been imposed by our respective countries.

“I would like to reiterate that should the Soviet government agree to lift such travel restrictions on American newsmen, we are prepared to do the same for Soviet newsmen, on a simultaneous basis. I believe if we were to do this in the very nearest future it could be pointed out as another indication of a lessening of tension between the United States and the Soviet Union as well as the opening up of free communication between our two peoples. I have always felt that this was of the greatest possible importance.

“I would appreciate your using your influence in bringing about this agreement. I shall hold this communication in confidence until you have time to reply to it.1

“I would like, again, to thank you for making the trip to the United States; for making the interview with the President possible. Through you, please express my thanks to Chairman Khrushchev for the gifts he sent me and my family.

“My best wishes to your wife and children.

“Sincerely,

“Pierre Salinger”

Pierre Salinger2



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR, Adzhubei Interview. Top Secret. Drafted by Salinger, and also sent to Bohlen and Bundy.

1 The following day Battle sent Salinger a memorandum stating that Rusk felt the draft letter would be most helpful, but also saying that the Secretary of State did not believe that Salingerʼs letter was the right medium to raise the question of lifting restrictions on newsmen. (Ibid.)

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.





136. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, December 1, 1961.

Nuclear Test Ban Talks

The new Soviet proposal for a simple four-point test ban agreement,1 containing provisions which the Soviets have long known were unacceptable to the West, underscores the USSRʼs intention to use the Geneva talks as a propaganda forum for denouncing the continuation of Western testing, particularly any US decision to undertake atmospheric tests. Moscow hopes to use the talks to repair the damage done to its image abroad by the long Soviet test series. The USSRʼs “new approach” is also intended to divert the discussions from previous Soviet obstructive demands such as the “troika” scheme in the control system and to exploit the US-UK rejection of a new uncontrolled moratorium on testing during the negotiations.

In a move designed to appear responsive to the Western position, the Soviet statement of 27 November2 recalled the 3 September proposal by President Kennedy and Prime Minister Macmillan for a ban on atmospheric testing, relying on existing means of detection, and proposed that this ban be extended to include outer space and underwater tests. On the crucial and unresolved issue of underground tests, Moscow proposed a moratorium pending agreement on a control system which would be a “composite part” of an international system to supervise a general disarmament agreement.

This new approach raised the possibility that the Soviet Union, despite Khrushchevʼs 10 September rejection of the US-UK proposal when the Soviet test series was just getting under way, may eventually propose that this Western proposal be adopted as the basis for an immediate agreement banning atmospheric tests. The Soviets may calculate that such a maneuver could inhibit the US from undertaking atmospheric tests and place the US and UK on the defensive in the talks.

A member of the Soviet delegation, in a conversation with a US delegate on 28 November, feigned surprise over the negative Western reaction to the new Soviet proposal and argued that the Soviet plan in essence went no further than the Western offer to ban atmospheric tests with monitoring left to existing national detection systems. The Soviet representative said theUSSR would “emphasize” that the Westʼs negative reaction represents a retreat from the 3 September proposal and insisted that world opinion would not understand this “switch” in position.

A TASS report on the 28 November session of the test ban talks said that the Soviet proposals were rejected by the Western representatives “without even bothering to study them.” The report claimed that from the start the Western delegates displayed intractability and insisted on their old positions, while US delegate Dean said that the Western powers would not halt nuclear tests. Soviet delegate Tsarapkin told newsmen after the session that he was “not very happy” about the Western reaction to the Soviet proposals but commented that “after careful study of our proposals, after consideration of our new approach, the West could easily come to an agreement on this basis.” Tsarapkin also said that the Soviet Union would not negotiate on the basis of “the ancient treaty proposed by the West.”

Moscowʼs current proposal for the first time includes a demand for French participation in the talks and adherence to the agreement, although Moscow began warning last March that French testing while the talks were in progress could make the talks pointless. One of reasons Khrushchev advanced for his 10 September rejection of the US-UK proposal to ban atmospheric tests was its failure to include France. Khrushchev said the USSR would not tolerate such an “impermissible situation.”

During the 28 November session Tsarapkin repeated the call for French participation but without making continuation of the talks dependent on fulfillment of this demand. His failure to do so and his mild comment that a pledge to refrain from testing would “facilitate” negotiations suggest that the Soviets are preparing for a long stay at Geneva and will try to place the onus for any breakoff of the talks on the Western powers. A Soviet delegate has already expressed “hope” that the Western delegations would follow the custom of proposing a Christmas recess.

By coming out in favor of an immediate ban on all tests, the Soviet leaders probably hope to convince neutral opinion that the Western desire for further tests is the main obstacle to an early agreement. In this connection Khrushchev explicitly stated in a recent letter to the president of the World Peace Council that if the Western powers conduct tests, “we too shall be obliged to return to them in order to keep our armed forces at the modern level.” In an obvious attempt to attract neutralist support for the “new approach,” the Soviet Foreign Ministry immediately passed copies of its latest proposals to the ambassadors of neutral countries. The 21 November Soviet note3 agreeing to return to the Geneva talks had similarly been distributed promptly to neutralist representatives.

The draft treaty was released by the Soviets on 27 November, the day before the Geneva test ban talks resumed after a recess of almost three months. It marks a further shift from the position taken by Moscow that a test ban agreement could be considered only as part of an agreement on complete and general disarmament. Whereas last spring and summer the Soviet delegation in Geneva insisted that a ban on tests apart from general disarmament would be unacceptable unless the Western powers accepted the “troika” principle for controlling a test agreement, the new Soviet proposal avoids the controversial control issues and pays only lip service to a general disarmament agreement.

The plan in effect calls for a separate, uncontrolled ban on all tests and is a reversion to the position taken in early 1960, when the USSR made a similar proposal for a permanent ban on all tests except small underground explosions, which would have been covered by a voluntary moratorium. That proposal was eventually modified to link the duration of the moratorium to a research program to improve detection and identification techniques; the current plan, however, would extend the moratorium on underground tests until agreement could be reached on a system of controls for such tests, which would form part of an international control system for general disarmament. In this way Moscow would avoid submitting to a system of foreign inspection, which it had earlier claimed was far too extensive for an agreement limited in scope. Moscow would also avoid having to defend the “troika” plan, which it contends would not be necessary under general disarmament.

The Soviet statement accompanying the new draft treaty asserts that it represents a “new approach” and is intended to “direct” the Geneva talks into a “practical current” in order to exclude the “difficulties and obstacles which stood in the way of an agreement in the past.” This line suggests that in the face of widespread criticism of Soviet testing, the Soviet leaders probably felt they could not afford to stand on either of their previous positions of linking a test treaty to agreement on general and complete disarmament, or demanding a “troika” system for controls. The proposal indicates, however, that no international controls over a test ban agreement would be implemented until a disarmament agreement was reached. (Concurred in by OSI)



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Confidential. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence and concurred in by the Office of Scientific Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 1-3 of the Weekly Review section of the issue.

1 November 28; for text, see Documents on Disarmament, 1961, p. 664.

2 For text, see ibid., pp. 659-663.

3 For text, see ibid., pp. 635-636.





137. Despatch From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, December 4, 1961.

No. 474

SUBJECT

Cultural Exchanges Involving Members of Congress



During my recent consultation in the Department when discussing the possible inclusion of exchanges between the Congress and the U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet I was informed that the Congress was opposed to any exchange of delegations. I was therefore somewhat surprised to receive a copy of a letter from Assistant Secretary Hays to the Vice President dated October 3, 19611 requesting the opinion of the Vice President on this problem. The Assistant Secretaryʼs letter itself expressed the Departmentʼs opposition to any formal exchange.

As the Department is aware, the Soviet authorities went out of their way to treat Senator Javits as a tourist and to refuse him interviews with higher Soviet officials connected with foreign trade, which was the specific sphere in which he was interested.2 Congressional visits have always been a problem for the Embassy. While according to the Departmentʼs instructions the Embassy is absolved from making arrangements for interviews of congressmen visiting the Soviet Union as tourists, in practice it is clearly impracticable for the Embassy to refuse its assistance to such congressional visitors. While these have not been numerous in the past year, I believe it can be anticipated that such visits will be more numerous in the future. I am thoroughly in agreement with the Department in insisting upon control over the actual arrangements for visits from members of the Supreme Soviet remaining in the hands of the Department. I believe that Senator Javits had considerable success in explaining to the Soviet officials concerned, in particular Mr. Zhukov of the State Committee for Cultural Relations With Foreign Countries, that the Congress does not have the function nor the facilities to handle the details of such visits. On the other hand I believe it would be to the interest of both the Department and the Embassy if some better system of handling congressional visits could be arranged. While I do not wish to push unduly my point of view as we can of course live with the present system, I believe Senator Javitsʼ experience justifies a re-examination of this question. In my opinion an official exchange of delegations between the Congress and the Supreme Soviet would be to the advantage of the United States. It is to our interest to encourage visits from Soviet officials who play an important role in their country. Although the Supreme Soviet is gradually growing somewhat in importance it is of course basically a rubber-stamp organization, the chief purpose of which is to enable the Soviet leadership to advocate its current policies to a cross section of its own officials. Nevertheless the members of the Supreme Soviet do play an important role in their own communities and are people who could be influenced by a visit to the United States. I am not impressed by the argument that a formal exchange of visits would tend to equate the undemocratic Supreme Soviet with the freely-elected Congress, since the character of the two organizations appears already to be widely known.

Even if a formal exchange of delegations is not agreed to by the Department, I believe it would be useful if the Congress could be persuaded to make some arrangements to coordinate visits of congressmen to the U.S.S.R. If this is not done it is quite likely that we will have separate visits from a number of congressmen interested in the same subject, and the Soviet authorities cannot be expected to make satisfactory arrangements for a number of individuals investigating the same field. A large number of requests to the Soviet authorities for assistance in arranging congressional visits in a given field, for example education, could also interfere with arrangements for specialized delegations in such field. Moreover, as matters now stand the Soviet authorities can give preference to congressmen whom they believe will give more favorable publicity to conditions in the Soviet Union rather than to congressmen who are likely to be more critical. If the Congress itself would set up some means of coordination it seems probable that balanced delegations would be formed which would avoid this difficulty.

L E Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1161/12-461. Confidential. Drafted by Thompson.

1 Not found.

2 Senator Jacob K. Javits of New York had visited the Soviet Union for the last 9 days of November. Documentation on his visit including a memorandum of his conversation with Zhukov, referred to below, is in Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100-JA. Senator Allen J. Ellender of Louisiana also visited the Soviet Union for 7 weeks beginning October 2. For his report on the visit, see U.S. Foreign Policy and Operations; additional documentation on his visit, including memoranda of his conversations with various Soviet officials, is in Department of State, Central File, 033.1100-EL.





138. Editorial Note


On December 9, 1961, Ambassador Thompson reported that a “usually reliable source” had told him that Anatoly F. Dobrynin, Chief of the American Section of the Foreign Ministry, would be nominated as Ambassador to the United States. Thompson stated his belief that this was an excellent choice of an official who would like to see an improvement in U.S.-Soviet relations, probably was a personal choice of Gromyko, and whose appointment had some significance as an indication of Soviet policy. (Telegram 1714 from Moscow; Department of State, Central Files, 601.6111/12-961)

Twelve days later Ambassador Menshikov called on Acting Secretary of State Ball to say that he was being relieved by his government and to ask for agrement for Dobrynin. (Memorandum of conversation, December 12; ibid., 601.6111/12-2161) On December 26 Secretary of State Rusk sent President Kennedy a memorandum recording this demarche and indicating his support for Dobrynin. (Ibid., 601.6111/12-2661) The following day McGeorge Bundy informed Rusk that the President approved the appointment, and the same day the Department of State informed the Soviet Embassy and Ambassador Thompson. (Memorandum for the Secretary of State; ibid., 601.6111/12-2761, and telegram 1507 to Moscow; ibid.) As the final act in his tenure as Ambassador, Menshikov called on Rusk on December 29 to report that he was leaving Washington on January 1, 1962. (Memorandum of conversation; ibid., 601.6111/12-2961)





139. Editorial Note


During the Kennedy-Macmillan summit in Bermuda on December 22, 1961, British Foreign Secretary Lord Home asked President Kennedy if he really intended to link the decision to test nuclear weapons in the atmosphere to the Berlin issue. According to the memorandum of conversation, Kennedy “replied in the affirmative. If a really good settlement could be achieved on Berlin, he believed—as a private matter, not for publication—that it would be easier to make a decision not to test. The Secretary of State emphasized that these two propositions would never be linked formally with the Soviets.” For text of the memorandum of conversation, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 278-281.

On December 30 Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs Bundy forwarded to Kennedy a memorandum by Presidentʼs Special Assistant Schlesinger which Bundy described in his covering memorandum as “a really powerful paper arguing for a last effort to avoid atmospheric testing, by announcement that we will not test in the air unless and until the Soviets do it again.” Schlesingerʼs memorandum, Bundy continued, “satisfies a feeling I have had for some time that you have a right to hear a better argument against testing now than you have yet heard from advisers nearly all of whom personally favor testing. I believe that if you personally care enough, and want to make the argument strongly enough, you can carry a decision against atmospheric testing with the Congress and the country. I also believe it is safe.” For text of Bundyʼs and Schlesingerʼs memoranda, see ibid., pages 282-287.

On January 17, 1962, Bundy forwarded to Kennedy a memorandum by his deputy, Carl Kaysen, which Bundy called in his covering memorandum “really of high importance” and capsulized as follows: “1. You can safely offer an atmospheric test-ban, because without atmospheric tests we can be sure of a nuclear stand-off, and even with them we cannot get anything better after 1963. 2. If Russians accept, you get a real step towards arms control. 3. If Russians reject, you shift much of the weight of our test series on them.” For text of Bundyʼs and Kaysenʼs memoranda, see ibid., pages 297-303 and 306.





140. Editorial Note


In telegram 1520 to Moscow, December 28, 1961, the Department of State instructed Ambassador Thompson to “engage in a series of discussions [on Berlin] with Mr. Gromyko with the object of finding out whether and in what area a basis for negotiations can be found.” In telegram 1840 to the Department of State, January 2, 1962, Thompson reported on the first in a series of meetings with Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko on the issue. Gromyko expressed his belief that an agreement could be reached on Western access to West Berlin but only in the context of a broader agreement resolving other German and European security issues. For text of telegrams 1520 and 1840, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XIV, pages 709-713 and 720-724.

In telegram 1651 to Moscow, January 10, the Department of State instructed Thompson to probe further on issues raised during his first meeting with Gromyko. The instructions noted, among other things, that if Gromyko pursued “broader questions,” Thompson should reply that “we have placed initial stress on Berlin access which we believe critical issue for reasons indicated. He [Gromyko] should understand, however, that what US would be prepared to say on other subjects will depend to great extent on reasonableness of Soviet position on Berlin access.” For text, see ibid., pages 736-740. In telegram 1932 to the Department of State, January 12, Thompson characterized his second meeting with Gromyko as completely negative. (Ibid., page 751, source note)





141. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Tyler) to Secretary of State RuskSource


Washington, January 2, 1962.

SUBJECT

Possible Powers-Abel Exchange



Background:

You may recall that on November 24, 1961 you sent a letter to the Attorney General (Tab A) setting forth the Departmentʼs position on a possible Powers-Abel exchange.1

This matter has been discussed on several occasions by representatives of the Department and CIA with Mr. Oehmann, Special Assistant to the Attorney General. The various facets of the problem have been carefully explored, including whether, if an exchange is agreeable from the standpoint of Justice, we should try to get more than Powers for Abel, i.e., whether we should try to get a package including some or all of those mentioned below. While there are of course Americans held in various bloc countries (Communist China, North Vietnam, etc.), for practical purposes it seemed logical to limit any potential “package” to the following: (1) Marvin Makinen, a 23 year old American student in Berlin who was arrested in the USSR this July. He was sentenced in September, 1961, to eight years for espionage and is in prison in the USSR. A moderate amount of interest and pressure on the Department has developed from Makinenʼs family and friends.

(2) Frederick Pryor, a 28 year old student in Berlin working on a Ph.D. dissertation on “Communist Foreign Trade”. He made many contacts in East Germany, including some with persons in ill favor with the Ulbricht regime. He was arrested August 25 and detained apparently on espionage grounds. A show trial is expected in January. His parents have been very active on his behalf, including an extended stay in Berlin. They have received a letter from “Mrs. Abel” proposing an exchange. The family knows nothing of the status of the Donovan-Mrs. Abel channel and believe they may play a leading role in a possible exchange.

(3) Victor Pankey-Gilbert Ferrey, the two college boys who were caught trying to smuggle a girl from East to West Berlin, and were sentenced to two years. A moderate amount of pressure and interest has been exerted through family and Congressional sources.





The possibility of a “peel off” negotiation has also been considered, i.e., ask for a 5 for 1 deal, then, if this is not acceptable, drop our asking price in stages down to a straight man for man exchange.

CIA has presented a strong position favoring a direct Powers-Abel exchange, believing that attempting to get a 5 for 1 or other combination “package” might complicate the effort to extricate Powers. Their evaluation of the importance of obtaining Powersʼ release has increased since their memorandum on the subject was prepared in November (Tab B).2

The probable adverse reaction from the families and others interested in the individuals held by the Communists to a straight Powers-Abel exchange was discussed at the Department of Justice and, we understand, was brought specifically to the attention of the Attorney General.

The Department has now been informed that the Attorney General has decided: 1) that he will agree to a Powers-Abel exchange;

2) that he will envisage an arrangement other than that previously stipulated, i.e., that Powers be back in the United States before Abel is released;

3) that he favors a direct Abel-Powers exchange, with no “strays” rung in, which he believes would create complications which might ruin the operation.





An additional factor of significance relating both to the scope of the exchange as well as public reaction is that CIA has developed a detailed plan for handling Powers should he be released. They would like to undertake a secret operation under which the release would not be disclosed for a considerable period of time and Powers would in effect be kept “under wraps” while he is debriefed and his future activities arranged.

Some thought has been given to the technique of a possible approach to the Soviets. Preliminary judgment in the Department of Justice, CIA and the Department favors using James Donovan, Abelʼs New York lawyer for this purpose. The most recent letter from Mrs. Abel to him3 has remained unanswered while the decision of the Attorney General on its wording was awaited. It is now believed preferable to consider having Donovan go to Germany to establish direct contact with Mrs. Abel and her Soviet contacts and seek to make arrangements. Donovan is highly regarded by CIA for this role as he has cooperated closely with the Government in all matters relating to the correspondence with Mrs. Abel and also has the advantage of apparently having achieved considerable respect from the communist side as a result of his spirited and able defense of Abel. CIA has sounded him out in the past few days and ascertained that he is prepared to act as intermediary. It is envisaged that if it is now agreed that he will be so designated he will be requested to come to Washington very soon for a careful briefing.4 CIA will finance the effort.

The principal aspect which we believe should be called to your attention relates to the “package-no package” decision. We thought that if for any reason you believe an effort should be made to arrange a “package” exchange for Abel, that you might wish to discuss the matter personally with the Attorney General and perhaps Mr. McCone. The chief advantage of a package deal, as we see it, is that it would give the Administration a better position vis-à-vis the families, possible Congressional inquiries, and the public.

If you agree that proceeding on a direct Abel-Powers exchange is appropriate in view of the circumstances, so that State-Justice-CIA concurrence exists on the point, we will continue our separate efforts to secure the release of the other Americans mentioned above. We also have asked CIA to check whether the West Germans are holding any East German or Soviet agents who might be “borrowed” as possible trading material for Pryor and possibly Ferrey and Pankey.

Recommendations:5

1. That we proceed on basis of direct exchange of Abel for Powers.

2. If you believe that attempt should be made to arrange a “package” exchange for Abel, that you speak to the Attorney General and Mr. McCone regarding this point.

3. That, subject to approval by Attorney General and CIA, James Donovan be authorized to act as intermediary, following briefing of him as to his mission.





* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 761.5411/1-262. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Donald A. Wehmeyer, Office of the Legal Advisor for European Affairs; concurred in by Richard Kearney, Assistant Legal Advisor for European Affairs, Robert Owen (SOV), and Bohlen; initialed by Tyler; and transmitted to Rusk through S/S.

1 Not printed. In this letter Rusk wrote:

“I do not believe that foreign policy considerations as such need be a factor influencing the Justice determination in consultation with the CIA as to whether we should proceed in an attempt to obtain the release of Powers in exchange for the release of Abel.”



2 Not printed.

3 Not printed, but most of this letter is published in Donovan, Strangers on a Bridge, pp. 367-368.

4 Presumably the meeting discussed ibid., pp. 371-372.

5 Rusk approved recommendations 1 and 3 and did not approve recommendation 2.





142. Letter From the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Thompson) to the Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Kennan)Source


Moscow, January 5, 1962.

Dear George: Your letter of December 261 just arrived and I am very glad to have your views. Actually I do not think that our opinions are very far apart. I was somewhat concerned at some of the statements in your telegram2 for the effect they might have on policy. Although your telegram was presumably marked Eyes Only I would assume it was read by at least the top Pentagon officials and I note that the President in a recent conversation, I think with Adenauer, said that you thought the Soviets were preparing to go to war while I disagreed. What disturbed me was the possibility that this might encourage advocates of surprise attack, particularly if and when we have a trial of nerves over the Berlin question as seems almost inevitable. As you will note from my telegram, I do think the Soviets will bring us very close to war and in fact have already done so. It is therefore natural that the Soviet military would insist upon having the resources they consider necessary if anything should go wrong. There are a good many signs that the military do exercise influence on the leadership, although I think this is confined to purely military matters. I think the Soviet military must have told Khrushchev that policy on the Berlin question was up to the Presidium but that since this involved a real risk of military conflict and since it had already generated extensive military measures on the part ofNATO and particularly the U.S., they must insist upon adequate steps being taken to enable them to carry out their responsibilities. I think this was the primary reason for the resumption of testing although I suspect another factor was Soviet realization that the Chinese Communists would not in any case go along with a controlled test ban. I also think that there is a division of opinion within the Soviet military establishment. I do not have much to base this on, but whenever there has been a real crisis in relations with us, including the U-2, some of the Soviet Marshals have gone out of their way conspicuously to be pleasant to me. As you know, actions of this kind are seldom coincidence here.

I quite agree that on the German problem we have at the moment little to offer and I suspect that in the end the best we will get is some arrangement after their signature of a separate treaty to keep East German interference within the limits of our tolerance, but this will be a most unsatisfactory situation. This seems a pity since after the Berlin wall was built it should have been possible for us to have produced a proposal which would have provided the Soviets with a real alternative to the risky course they will probably follow. The situation is not, however, quite as bad as it appears because if we find that the Soviets would give us some real improvement on access which would have a genuine promise of durability we could go much further with our allies than we have been able to do on an abstract basis. The difficulty here of course is that the Soviets will almost never reveal their side of a bargain first. With so many strings and so many kibitzers my task appears almost hopeless but I intend to give it a real try.

This is a most interesting period here and although people are beginning to talk much more freely, it is frustrating not to know what is really going on. There is no doubt that there have been very sharp differences on policy within the leadership. Some of these are set forth in Research MemorandumRSB-35, December 11, 1961,3 of the Departmentʼs Bureau of Intelligence and Research. The FBIS made an excellent study documenting the thesis that Khrushchev was obliged to retreat from his advocacy of greater allocation to non-agricultural consumers goods. You may also have read Conquestʼs book on the leadership4 and his thesis (which the Department inclines to accept and which I much doubt) that Khrushchev wanted to punish the anti-Party group more than he was able to do because of opposition within the Party. While I am convinced that many of Khrushchevʼs policies meet vigorous criticism and even opposition, I do not think this takes the form of any attempt to supplant him. Another development which will bear watching is the growing influence of the new generation. Adzhubei on New Yearʼs Eve asked me to call the Presidentʼs attention to the fact that the new Soviet Ambassador to Washington was a member of “their generation.” He is, incidentally, an excellent man and I consider that his appointment and that of Soldatov to London are all to the good.

I should be more than delighted if you would visit Moscow and hope that you would bring Annelise and of course would expect you to stay with us. I expect to leave in the spring and it could be that I might leave earlier if there is some definite turn in the Berlin problem. When I asked the Secretary some months ago what my chances of getting away from here were, he replied that I was in the same category as Bizerte. I think that despite the indications from the Soviets that they would not object to a visit, it would be well either for you through the Soviet Embassy or for me here informally to sound out the Soviets before making an actual application for a visa. I think they would appreciate the courtesy of having an opportunity informally to suggest a change in timing if there should be some subject such as Soviet-Yugoslav relations, the Albanian question, or even internal policy toward Soviet intellectuals on the carpet at the time you planned your visit.

I gather that the intellectuals, along with other groups, are currently probing to see how far they can go following the 22nd Congress. Given the Russian character it is quite likely that they will go too far and have to be checkreined.

I will be most interested in your reactions to the current Soviet scene. I think you will be startled in two ways: to find how much some things are exactly the same while others have completely changed. Internally I believe the regime is approaching a crossroads and the outcome of the Berlin problem may have great influence on which path they take.

Jane joins me in best wishes to you both. We envy you the skiing which we had also planned but as usual the Department decided otherwise.

Sincerely,

Llewellyn E. Thompson5



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 761.00/1-561. Secret; Official-Informal.

1 For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XIV, pp. 705-708.

2 Regarding this telegram and the one referred to below, see ibid., footnote 1, p. 705.

3 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/12-1161)

4 Robert Conquest, Power and Policy in the USSR: The Study of Soviet Dynasties, New York, 1961.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.





143. Editorial Note


On January 17, 1962, the intelligence community issued Special National Intelligence Estimate 80-62, which sought to estimate the threat to U.S. security interests in the Caribbean area over the next two decades. Regarding the possible establishment of a hostile military presence, the estimate stated the following: “Cuba and any other Caribbean state which fell under Communist control could be used by the USSR as areas in which to establish missile, submarine, or air bases, designed to bring North America under attack or to add to the deterrents to any conceivable US military action in the Caribbean or elsewhere. On the whole, we believe the establishment of such Soviet bases is unlikely for some time to come. Their military and psychological value, in Soviet eyes, would probably not be great enough to override the risks involved.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume X, pages 706-709.





144. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of StateSource


London, January 18, 1962, 3 p.m.

2657. Press reports of what Secretary is alleged to have said to Senate Foreign Relations Committee on Kremlin developments have aroused considerable interest in FonOff.1 These reports plus Molotov muddle2 have also given rise to considerable speculation in British press as to Khrushchevʼs current power position, andFonOff has been under some pressure to respond to press inquiries as to how it views present situation in light of recent developments. Accordingly FonOff (Northern Dept) has worked out following preliminary assessment, sanitized version of which is being used as basis for backgrounders to local press (note, for example, Middletonʼs New York Times despatch Jan 18).

1. Foreign observers in Moscow have been struck by rather peculiar atmosphere of uncertainty there since New Year.

2. While no real evidence to support idea that there is serious split within Kremlin or that radical change of policy imminent, FonOff has been impressed by possible significance of number of recent rather surprising developments, including (a) confused handling of Molotovʼs return to Vienna, (b) Khrushchevʼs silence on foreign affairs since December 9 WFTU speech,3 (c) absence of bloc New Year messages to Ulbricht and omission Ulbrichtʼs New Year speech of any mention of deadline for Berlin settlement, (d) unusual form of Soviet approach to West Germans over Berlin,4 (e) shift to harder line in Gromykoʼs second talk with Amb Thompson.5

3. In FonOff view these developments should be assessed against the following problems currently confronting Khrushchev: (a) delay in effecting Berlin settlement in accordance with his November 1958 ultimatum; (b) his difficulties with China and Albania and consequent repercussions in bloc; (c) his recognition of growing Western confidence in USA in light of U.S. reappraisal of military balance between East and West.

4. FonOff assumes that Soviets are in process of reconsideration their policies with regard to three issues cited above. Although it points out Soviet leaders give no impression of being in state of crisis with Khrushchev travelling around Byelorussia and Mikoyan off in Africa.

5. As to effect of such re-examination on Soviet actions and implications it may hold for West, FonOffʼs crystal ball is somewhat cloudy. In FonOff view, it is difficult to see what easy solutions Khrushchev can find on either Berlin or his difficulties with Albania or China. He may even contemplate stalling on these while focusing on this third problem—the military balance. He may contemplate distractions elsewhere making the most of opportunities such as exploiting the anti-colonial gale blowing through the UN and coming forward with plausible schemes of disengagement and international security. While Berlin may be put on back burner, FonOff continues believe that Khrushchev will use any suitable occasion for harassments over access to Berlin although avoiding action which might risk hostilities however limited.



In discussing above assessment with Embassy FonOff stressed preliminary and informal nature of its views and expressed interest in being informed of Deptʼs current appraisal of recent rather puzzling developments and particularly if appropriate of substance of Secretaryʼs remarks to Senate Foreign Relations Committee which had been widely reported in local press.6

Bruce



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 761.00/1-1862. Confidential. Repeated to Moscow and Paris.

1 For a transcript of Ruskʼs January 15 testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on the world situation, see Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, 1962, pp. 65-109.

2 Vyacheslav M. Molotov, the Soviet representative on the U.N. Atomic Energy Commission in Vienna, had been called back to Moscow in November 1961, and then in January spokesmen for the Foreign Ministry and Soviet press failed to coordinate announcements about his future after he was barred from returning.

3 Khrushchevʼs address to the Trade Union Congress was printed in Pravda, December 10, 1961.

4 For text of the Soviet memorandum on Berlin and Germany, December 27, 1961, see Moskau Bonn, pp. 876-887.

5 Regarding Thompsonʼs meeting with Gromyko, January 12, see Document 140.

6 On January 22 Thompson reported that the British analysis seemed “generally sound,” but added that the Soviets had exchanged New Yearʼs messages with Ulbricht (paragraph 2c) and the problems of agriculture and dimmer prospects in Africa might be added to paragraph 3. He concluded that while there were “undoubtedly disputes within Soviet leadership over several current policies, I do not see in this any indication of a real power struggle for leadership within Soviet party itself.” (Telegram 2008 from Moscow; Department of State, Central Files, 761.00/1-2262)





145. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Dutton) to Senator Kenneth B. KeatingSource


Washington, January 24, 1962.

Dear Senator Keating: I have your communication of January 111 in which you inquire concerning student exchanges between the United States and the Soviet Union.

The U.S.-U.S.S.R. Exchanges Agreements of January 28, 1958 and November 21, 19592 have provided for exchange of graduate students between the United States and the Soviet Union. This exchange, like the other exchanges provided by the Agreements, is governed by the principle of reciprocity so that Soviet graduate students are received only on the basis that a similar number of American graduate students are received in the Soviet Union under similar conditions. During the current academic year, thirty-six Soviet graduate students are enrolled in American universities while thirty-seven American graduate students have been accepted in Soviet institutions.

The exchange program with the Soviet Union, as you undoubtedly know, is carried out under the provisions of National Security Council directives. Individual exchanges including the graduate student exchange, as well as the program as a whole, are under continuing evaluation to insure that they are in the national interest. We do not feel that the small number of Soviet students involved will deprive any American students of places in our universities, particularly since they are enrolled in special programs at the graduate level. In any case, we believe that the advantages of having a carefully selected group of mature American graduate students, with a good command of the Russian language, enrolled in Soviet universities more than compensates for any disadvantages in having Soviet students in the United States. No other group of American citizens is in a position to come into such close contact with everyday life in the Soviet Union and particularly with an important segment of Soviet society. We consider there are also some advantages in exposing a limited number of future Soviet intellectuals and scientific leaders to life in the United States. Appropriate measures are taken to see that their presence in the United States does not constitute a serious security hazard.

The report in the New York Times of January 2 that the United States and the Soviet Union have permitted the Exchanges Agreement to lapse, may be misleading. The November 21, 1959 Agreement provided for exchanges during the years 1960-1961, a period which is now concluded. It is possible that there will be negotiations on a new exchanges agreement to provide for exchanges during the years 1962-1963 within the next month or two, and preliminary drafts have already been exchanged. In the meantime, those portions of the last Agreement that govern continuing or recurring programs, such as the graduate student exchange, are considered to be still in effect.

If we can be of further assistance please do not hesitate to let us know.

Sincerely yours,

FGD



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 511.613/1-1162. No classification marking. Drafted by Martens and cleared in SES.

1 Not printed, but attached to the source text.

2 For text of the 1958 agreement, see 9 UST 13; for text of the 1959 agreement, see 10 UST 1934.





146. Letter From the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Thompson) to the Secretary of Stateʼs Special Assistant (Bohlen)Source


Moscow, January 25, 1962.

Dear Chip: I note in todayʼs radio bulletin that the President has invited Adzhubei to lunch. This raises some questions in my mind. I must admit that his interview with the President1 was a ten-strike for us. This subsequent invitation however makes me wonder if it is really a good idea to build him up as much as we are doing. He is a forceful young man and is endeavoring to encourage young Communists to play a greater role in life here, which is all to the good. On the other hand, I believe that he is personally very anti-American and he is certainly a ruthless careerist. While I understand that the workers on his paper think that he is doing a useful service to Soviet journalism by introducing new practices, I do not think that he is personally respected and he has undoubtedly made many enemies. I doubt very much that he will survive them if anything happens to his father-in-law. Another point that bothers me is that Adzhubeiʼs paper has been running almost daily for some months vicious anti-American articles and cartoons.2 I donʼt like to see him rewarded for this type of thing. I would therefore dislike to see us get too tied to him, although this is of course a good way for the President to get thoughts to Khrushchev. I have no feeling whatever about my personal position in this, for as you know I can easily see Khrushchev at any time. I do think however that Khrushchev would like to undercut and diminish the role of the Secretary. While this is doubtless recognized and need not cause us concern, it doesnʼt seem wise to encourage the Soviets in the idea that they can do this. You may wish to discuss this subject with the Secretary or Pierre Salinger. In any event, I would keep my powder very dry in any dealings with Adzhubei.3

All the best,

Llewellyn E. Thompson4



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/1-2562. Secret; Official-Informal.

1 See Document 134.

2 Thompson had also made these points in telegram 2038 from Moscow, January 25. (Department of State, Central Files, 911.6261/1-2561)

3 On February 5 Bohlen informed Thompson that he had shown this letter to the President before his second conversation with Adzhubei (see Document 150). Kennedy seemed to agree with what the Ambassador said, and Bohlen believed that it did some good. Bohlen also reported that he had dropped a few words with the White House staff as to what Moscow might be trying to do. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/2-562)

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.





147. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource


Washington, January 26, 1962, 9:29 a.m.

3985. Re Londonʼs 2657, Moscowʼs 2008.1 Department generally agrees with British analysis Soviet developments, subject to comments in Moscowʼs 2008, with which Department agrees.

Our crystal ball no less cloudy than British. We inclined believe, however, there less question of serious split in Soviet leadership than indecision among leaders, including Khrushchev, over policies to follow. Closely related factor is magnitude and number of inter-related problems requiring decision. As both FonOff and Embassy Moscow point out, Khrushchev and Mikoyan trips strongly indicate absence of leadership crisis. These trips do indicate, however, seriousness with which Soviets view certain of problems they currently facing: agriculture (Khrushchev tours) and relations with African states, especially following apparent difficulties in Guinea (Mikoyan trip). We also inclined believe that at least until other problems are partially back on rails Soviets wish let Berlin crisis simmer without either reaching boiling point, or bringing loss of prestige which Soviet calling off of crisis would involve.

Senior Department officers have spoken on above lines in various recent appearances before Congressional committees.

Ball



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 761.00/1-1862. Confidential. Drafted by Valdes on January 25, cleared by Guthrie and Bohlen, and approved by Kohler. Repeated to Moscow and Paris.

1 Document 144 and footnote 6 thereto.





148. Editorial Note


On January 28, 1962, Assistant Secretary of State Harriman called in Soviet Charge Smirnovsky. Talking informally from an oral statement, Harriman informed him that the United States supported the agreement reached in Geneva on January 19 among the three Laotian factions and hoped the upcoming meeting of the three factions in Laos would enable them to form a government and send a united delegation to the conference in Geneva. Harriman then noted that the United States might be forced to increase pressure on Royal Lao Government leaders to “induce them to negotiate in good faith and not to obstruct settlement by unreasonable demands.” Since such pressures might include withholding aid, which could weaken the Royal Lao Government politically and militarily, the United States would “need assurances from Soviet Govʼt that they will see to it that P[athet] L[ao] do not take advantage of the situation.” For text of Harrimanʼs oral statement transmitted to Moscow in telegram 1758, January 28, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XXIV, pages 601-603.

On February 1 the Department of State instructed Ambassador Thompson to take up the matter of Pathet Lao/North Vietnamese attacks on Royal Lao Government forces in the provincial capital city of Nam Tha, stressing that the United States could not be expected to pressure the Royal Lao Government when it was under leftist military attack. (Ibid., page 611, footnote 1) In telegram 2109 to the Department, February 3, Thompson reported that Georgi Pushkin, Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister for Southeast Asian Affairs, took the message but made no commitment on a Soviet response. For text, see ibid., pages 611-612.





149. Editorial Note


In telegram 1768 to Moscow, January 29, 1962, the Department of State instructed Ambassador Thompson to meet once again with Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko on Berlin, stating that “we should still keep discussion within broader framework and not yet indicate we have come to conclusion that all hope of arrangement other than for in extremis situation has been abandoned.” The telegram continued, “we see purpose of next round, therefore, as essentially to impress on Soviets that rigid maintenance of their present position will prevent agreement but that some flexibility on their part may provide basis for progress.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XIV, pages 772-775.

In telegram 2100 to the Department of State, February 1, Thompson reported back on his meeting with Gromyko, during which no apparent progress was made. “Gromyko stated he must assume that the USG apparently does not have any intention of discussing seriously the matters under question.” This was confirmed, he stated, by the fact that the proposals presented by the U.S. were “not at all realistic and Soviet attitude toward them is well-known.” In telegram 2175, February 9, Thompson reported on yet another meeting with Gromyko, which produced no apparent progress. For text of telegrams 2100 and 2175, see ibid., pages 784-788 and 797-800.





150. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, January 30, 1962, 1 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Mr. Pierre Salinger

Mr. A. Akalovsky, ACDA/IR

Mr. Alexei Adzhubei, Editor-in-Chief, Izvestiya

Mr. Georgi Bolshakov, Editor-in-Chief, USSR Magazine



The President had a conversation with Mr. Adzhubei both before and after the luncheon he and Mrs. Kennedy hosted for Mr. and Mrs. Adzhubei. The reporting officer was not present at the conversation after lunch. That conversation is reported on the basis of the information given by the President to the drafter. The following subjects were discussed before lunch: 1. Cuba

Mr. Adzhubei stated that he had had two conversations with Castro, each lasting about three hours. Castro had been rather reasonable in his remarks about the United States, but in view of the strain in US-Cuban relations, had not asked Mr. Adzhubei to convey any message to the President. Mr. Adzhubei wondered whether the United States realized that by its unfriendly attitude toward Castro it was pushing Cuba farther and farther away.

The President emphasized that the strong reaction in the United States toward events in Cuba was due to the fact that over the past hundred and some odd years, the United States had had no hostile power close to its borders. Therefore, when a group which preached hostility toward the United States seized power in Cuba, the reaction in the United States was bound to be very strong. The US was psychologically unprepared for such a change. The President pointed out that the USSR would have the same reaction if a hostile group arose in the vicinity of its borders. In this connection, the President referred to the Soviet reaction to the Hungarian uprising.



2. Laos

The President emphasized that the United States intends to use every means to influence the Boun Oum Government to accept the formation of a Government under Souvanna. He said that he realized that on both sides in Laos there were groups who desired renewal of military action. On the one side, there are people who believe that they would win in that event; while on the other side, on the right, there are people who think that resumption of hostilities would involve the United States.

Mr. Adzhubei wondered whether the United States, proceeding from the premise of false contradictions between the USSR and China, was seeking to delay the solution of the Laotian question and to exploit the Laotian situation for the purpose of aggravating Sino-Soviet relations.

The President categorically denied that the United States was seeking to exacerbate Sino-Soviet relations over the Laotian question. He said that such policy would be unwise. However, he said it was his belief that theUSSR, just as the US, was more interested in a peaceful solution of the Laotian situation than China. He said he thought that both the US and the USSR were interested in a peaceful solution in Laos because Laos was far from either of the two countries and was not an area of vital interest to them. The President reiterated that the US was going to make every effort to get the Boun Oum Government to accept a reasonable solution under Souvanna. He expressed the hope that both sides would exert their influence during the next few days in order to prevent renewal of hostilities, which would be fraught with disastrous consequences.

Mr. Adzhubei said that he was gratified to hear the Presidentʼs views and that he would report them immediately to Moscow. However, he said he was sorry that the US and theUSSR seemed to be having less difficulty in finding a mutual accommodation on matters that are not vitally important to them, rather than on those in which they have vital interests.



3. Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

The President observed that one of the basic tenets of US foreign policy is that the US is opposed to the proliferation of nuclear weapons. He recalled, in this connection, his statement during the interview he gave Mr. Adzhubei last fall.1 The President reiterated that the US is opposed to Germanyʼs acquiring nuclear weapons, just as it is opposed to any other Statesʼ acquiring such weapons. He referred to the fact that the US has not given France any information necessary for the development of a nuclear capability. In response to Mr. Adzhubeiʼs question as to whether the US was opposed to giving nuclear weapons to NATO as a group of States, the President said that such an arrangement might be one way of discouraging individual States from seeking to acquire nuclear weapons. He said that the United States was concerned that at some point France would realize how expensive development of nuclear weapons and of means of delivery was, and that at that point, West Germany and France might join forces in their effort to develop a nuclear capability of their own. A multilateral arrangement with regard to control of nuclear weapons might be a solution to this problem. However, the President expressed doubt that a satisfactory formula for such an arrangement could be found.

Mr. Adzhubei reacted rather impulsively to this statement by the President, saying that if nuclear weapons were given to NATO, they would also be given to the Warsaw Pact. He said that the Warsaw Pact would have less difficulty in developing a formula. He then said that the President should stop reading diplomatic despatches and should send someone who could give him a first-hand account of what is really going on in the Soviet Union. He said that the Soviet people are peace-loving and friendly, but also tough and full of resolve and can resort to extreme measures. This led to a discussion on Berlin.



4. Berlin

The President pointed out that Berlin was a very involved situation and that it would be rather difficult to find a perfect solution for it. However, he did not see why at least a temporary arrangement satisfactory to both sides could not be found. After all, he said, no one knew what situation would prevail five or ten years from now. He observed that there was no need in telling him that the Soviet people were tough and full of resolve because he knew that very well and was quite familiar with the history of the past war. In any event, this was not the point. The American people were also tough, and could also resort to extreme measures. The question is how to avoid resort to extreme measures—and this is the task of leadership. In spite of French wishes to the contrary, the US had engaged in conversation with theUSSR in Moscow, hoping that later negotiations could be transferred to a higher level. However, the Soviet memorandum2 given Ambassador Thompson at his second meeting with Mr. Gromyko seemed to be a step back to where we had been before; and, in fact, created the impression that the Soviet Union slammed the door in front of Ambassador Thompson.

Mr. Adzhubei said that he was not familiar with the details of the talks between Ambassador Thompson and Mr. Gromyko.





The following topics were discussed during the conversation after luncheon: 1. Cuba

Mr. Adzhubei wondered whether the US would prefer Cuba to develop into a State like Yugoslavia or have it drift in the direction of China. He noted that there were quite a few Chinese in Cuba. He emphasized that, primarily because of Cuban fears of US invasion, the USSR was seeking to help Cuban economy and was buying more sugar from Cuba than it really needed and was pumping more money into that country than it really wanted to. He also raised the question of Cuban volunteers and inquired whether the US intended to invade Cuba.

The President replied in the negative.



2. Germany and Berlin

The President went over the text of the Soviet memorandum given Ambassador Thompson, and there was some conversation which was rather inconclusive.



3. Sino-Soviet Relations

Mr. Adzhubei admitted some differences between China and the USSR, but emphasized that China and the USSR would be together if there was any aggression.



4. The Molotov Situation

At one point, Mr. Adzhubei said that Mr. Khrushchev was of the opinion that if a plebiscite had been taken in 1957, Molotov would have obtained 95% of the votes and he only 5%. On the other hand, if a poll were taken today, it would be Mr. Khrushchev who would obtain 95% of the votes and Mr. Molotov would get only 5%.

Throughout the conversation, both before and after lunch, Mr. Adzhubei seemed to emphasize that he is regarded in the Soviet Union as Mr. Khrushchevʼs “American boy.” He also expressed his concern about what he seemed to regard as humiliations. In this connection, he referred to some press story which said that he had actually imposed himself on Mr. Salinger, as well as to the way the matter of the Attorney Generalʼs possible visit to the USSR and the Salinger-Kharlamov meeting in Paris had been handled with the press. At one point, he remarked that he had certain ambitions and that he did not wish to die politically.3





* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series,USSR, Adzhubei Interview. Confidential; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky on January 31. The meeting was held at the White House. The source text is a double-spaced draft.

1 See Document 134.

2 Regarding this memorandum, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XIV, pp. 751-755.

3 Kennedy and Adzhubei resumed their conversation at 6:30 p.m. January 31. For a memorandum of this part of the conversation, devoted almost entirely to Berlin, see ibid., pp. 780-784.





151. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Press Secretary (Salinger) to President KennedySource


Washington, February 1, 1962.

Following is a report of my meetings with Mikhail Khalarmov, Chief of the Press Division of the Soviet Foreign Ministry, in Paris on Sunday and Monday (January 28-29, 1962). The meetings were arranged to discuss a television show featuring the President and Chairman Khrushchev.1

The first meeting on Sunday night was a social affair at the home of Cecil Lyon, Minister at the United States Embassy in Paris. Also present were: Pierre Baraduc, Chief of the Press Office of the French Foreign Ministry; John Mowinkle, the Public Information Officer for USIS in France; Jack Hedges, Press Officer for USIS at our Paris Embassy; and Mr. Kondrashev, Press Attaché of the Soviet Embassy in Paris. The evening was largely a social affair but Khalarmov did make these points: (1) Molotov is not going back to Vienna. He is remaining in Moscow. Khalarmov described him as a “political cadaver” who has no significance and to whom no one pays any attention in the Soviet Union. He says the news that Molotov is going back to Vienna was in error; someone with the International Atomic Energy group in Vienna bought him a ticket thinking he was returning to Vienna.

(2) People in the west should not take any stock in the story that there is a crisis in the Kremlin. There is no such crisis. Khalarmov pointed out that Khrushchev had been on vacation in the country; Mikoyan had been in Africa; other Soviet officials were traveling in the Soviet Union. He said if there were a crisis these movements would not have been possible.





Khalarmov and Baraduc exchanged a long series of statements on the subject of censorship. This was opened by Baraducʼs expression of unhappiness upon the barring from the Soviet Union a French correspondent named Sascha Simon of Le Figaro. Khalarmov replied this did not seem to be a practice limited to Communist countries and pointed to French government statements on the exclusion of NBCʼs John Rich from Paris.

On Monday, Mr. Murrow and I met with Khalarmov at the Soviet Embassy. We were accompanied by Mr. Burton an interpreter from the American Embassy. Khalarmov also had an interpreter with him. We immediately got down to the subject of the television exchange. Khalarmov brought up the subject of the amount of time each of the Principals could expect and asked whether our 7-1/2 minute proposal was one to which we were wedded. Mr. Murrow and I expressed the belief that it was not a hard and fast proposal. Khalarmov asked if we could extend the time. We then proposed 15 minutes for each and he assented to this.

It was also decided the Chairman and the President would be simultaneously translated. The translation would be done by someone of each governmentʼs choice, i.e., Khrushchev would be translated by someone of Soviet choice; Kennedy would be translated by American choice. In addition, each side would provide the other with an authorized translation of the Principalsʼ statements. This would obviate any charge of changing the meaning through translation. Khalarmov pointed out the problems of translation by citing the Kennedy-Adzhubei interview, which had been given in English to five different people, then translated by them into Russian and in turn given to five other people who translated it back into English. He said the result was five different interviews.

We next discussed the order of appearance of the two Principals. It was determined that each of the two countries could exercise its own decision as to what order to broadcast the Principals. In the subsequent world-wide distribution of the program the order could be determined by the country in which it was shown.

Khalarmov then brought up the point of exchanging drafts. He said he thought it would be helpful if each could exchange drafts before finally filming the show. Mr. Murrow stated we did not want the exchange of drafts to become a stumbling block to the actual filming of the program through the continuous exchange of drafts until both sides were satisfied. Khalarmov agreed that there would be only one exchange of drafts. Following that exchange each Principal would be free to say what he wanted to say. Mr. Murrow suggested that they address themselves to the general topic of “What Kind of a World I Would Like to Live In.” Khalarmov agreed the first discussion should be a general one but that neither Principal should be tied down to the substance of his discussion. Khalarmov also stated he hoped after the first general exposition of views by the President and the Chairman that it might be possible to have future programs in which they could discuss specific problems.

Khalarmov also said—and we agreed—that the television show should be used to advance relations between the two countries and that neither side should use it to restate well-known polemics of the cold war.

Khalarmov said the only matter on which he would have to check with the Chairman would be the timing. He asked if we had a time in mind. We opened by offering March 15, 1962. In a subsequent discussion on the simultaneous showing of the film in the United States and Moscow, we decided to propose the date of Sunday, March 18th with a release time in Moscow of 7:00 p.m. and a 12:00 noon release in Washington; there, of course, being no bar to the replaying of the program. It was further decided that the drafts would be exchanged by March 1st with the filming to be done around March 9th or 10th.

The technical problems re the compatibility of American and Soviet equipment was discussed. Mr. Murrow and Mr. Khalarmov agreed that the initial film would be done on 35mm film and that each side would then convert to whatever was most necessary, such as 16mm film or video tape.

Mr. Khalarmov agreed to seek the greatest possible distribution of the film in countries under Soviet influence. He pointed out that there was a direct television cable link from Moscow with Prague, Budapest and Warsaw. He said he would also look into the matter of Rumania and Yugoslavia. Both sides agreed however that the film should be given the widest possible dissemination around the world.

Khalarmov said he would go back to Moscow, arriving in about seven days and would communicate to me the decision of the Chairman in regard to the date. He also suggested that all future communications in regard to this particular problem be conducted through the channel in which the arrangements for our meeting had been made.

At the conclusion of this part of the discussion, Khalarmov asked if there were any other matters which should be brought up. I told him that, through a Soviet source, the question of a direct telephone channel between the President and the Chairman had been raised. I asked him if my information was correct. Khalarmov said it was correct; that someone (an American) a year or a year-and-a-half ago had contacted him about installing such a circuit; there had been some discussion of this subject and great interest evinced. He said, however, that he had never been apprised of the Presidentʼs interest on this matter. I told him I had not discussed the subject with the President and was, therefore, not in a position to report his interest or disinterest; that if Soviet interest reflected any real desire in this connection I would take it up with the President. Khalarmov said he would look into the matter himself and report back to me. He said, however, that in times of crisis it would be most effective to have instantaneous communication between the Chairman and the President.

Mr. Khalarmov then brought up the subject of Laos. He said the United States government should exert further pressure on Boun Oum to bring about a solution of the problem of Laos. I stated that the President and the Chairman had agreed at Vienna that the best possible solution was the creation of a neutral and independent Laos and I said I knew we were working toward that end. Murrow said that any government may, from time to time, have trouble with its own allies and pointed to the present Soviet difficulties with Red China. Mr. Khalarmov replied that this was not the same. Khalarmov went on to say that the Soviet Union agreed that there should be a neutral and independent Laos and the solution on the problem of Laos could lead to the solution of other problems. It would also lead the people of the Soviet Union to believe that the Soviet Union could do business with the people of the United States.

This discussion broke up at around 12:30 p.m. followed by lunch during which the conversation was almost entirely social. A great many barbs were aimed by Khalarmov at Mr. Murrow; accusing him of playing the role of a “master propagandist”. Murrow replied that he wished Khalarmov could testify before the Senate Appropriations Committee for such testimony would no doubt go far in increasing the USIA budget. Mr. Murrow inquired when the Soviet Union was going to stop jamming the Voice of America. Khalarmov said the jamming would stop when VOA presented a reasonable view of the Soviet Union. The meeting concluded with the understanding between Khalarmov and me that no announcement or statement would be made until he had time to check with the Chairman. We agreed the Soviet Union and the United States would make a joint announcement of the broadcast on approximately March 9th or 10th; the texts to be mutually agreed to in advance. I agreed that if questioned by reporters, I would make a general statement to the effect that we had had a general discussion of improving Soviet-American communications; that I would make no statements with reference to the television broadcast.

Pierre Salinger



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/2-162. Secret; Eyes Only. Also sent to Rusk and Murrow.

1 Following the Vienna summit Salinger had proposed to Kharlamov a series of direct television exchanges between President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev. (Salinger, With Kennedy, p. 181) On January 18 Bolshakov told Salinger that Khrushchev had agreed to the idea, that Adzhubei had invited the Salingers to visit him in Moscow, and that the Soviet Union would be receptive to a visit by Attorney General Kennedy. (Ibid., pp. 208-209) At a subsequent meeting Salinger and Bolshakov agreed to meet with Murrow and Kharlamov in Paris, January 28-29, to arrange the details of the television exchange. Regarding Salingerʼs visit to Moscow, see Documents 193 and 195. The President however, declined the invitation for his brother to visit Moscow, but it appeared in a front page story of The New York Times on January 21, before Salinger could inform Bolshakov. Despite an announcement by the Attorney General of previous commitments, the Soviet Union, according to Salinger, regarded this as a direct affront. (Salinger, With Kennedy, p. 209)





152. Editorial Note


The Geneva Test Ban Conference adjourned without further progress on January 29, 1962. On February 2 the Department of State informed posts in Europe that the “breakdown of nuclear test ban talks should not be interpreted as anything more than US unwillingness continue indefinitely with talks which Soviet rejection of concept of international control had made devoid of content.” For text of the message, transmitted in telegram Topol 1110 to the U.S. Mission to NATO, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, page 311.





153. Editorial Note


On February 10, 1962, the United States exchanged Colonel Rudolf I. Abel for Francis Gary Powers and Frederick Pryor at the Glienicker Bridge, which linked East and West Berlin. For an account of the exchange by one of the participants, see Donovan, Strangers on a Bridge.





154. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Press Secretary (Salinger) to President KennedySource


Washington, February 14, 1962.

I met on February 13, 1962 with Georgi Bolshakov, Editor of USSR Magazine at his request. He made the following points: (1) Chairman Khrushchev had agreed to all the conditions discussed between myself and Mikhail Khalarmov in Paris.1 The only change requested was for a change of dates. Chairman Khrushchev has suggested the following dates to which I have tentatively agreed— (a) Exchange of draft statements on March 8 (through Georgi Bolshakov).

(b) Announcement on March 15. I am to prepare a draft announcement and submit it to Khalarmov for approval.

(c) Exchange of film on March 18. Film to be delivered to the American Embassy in Moscow; Soviet Embassy in Washington.

(d) First showing at 8:00 p.m., Moscow time on March 25 and 12:00 noon,EST, March 25.





(2) Bolshakov wanted to know if there was any further information on Mr. Robert F. Kennedyʼs intentions.

(3) Chairman Khrushchev is very interested in the Washington-Moscow telephone set-up discussed in Paris. If the President is interested in this proposal, the Soviets would like to institute technical discussions on how to work it out.

(4) In regard to the current cultural exchange negotiations,2 Mr. Bolshakov feels there are certain points which the Americans are being difficult about— (a) Re artistic troupes the exchange has been on the basis of one troupe for one troupe. Bolshakov says the Americans are imposing equality of pay for the troupes. The Soviets do not feel this is equitable. He points out that an exchange might involve the Moishev Ballet for the Benny Goodman band which are not comparable organizations. Further, he said travelling distances in the Soviet Union are much longer than in the United States; that the United States has much bigger halls. He suggested that the matter of payment be left to the impressarios.

(b) Bolshakov said the Americans are insisting on the rights of American students to go to Russian research institutes. He said such institutes are not primarily educational institutions and that our government should understand the difference. They have no objection for some of our students attending some of these institutes but do not want it written into the contract of agreement.

(c) There are 30 categories of technical exchanges. The United States is proposing one exchange in only two of the 30 categories; the Soviets are proposing 5 out of 15 categories. The Soviets feel that the base upon which the Americans are working is too narrow.





Mr. Bolshakov and I went on to discuss the recent articles in the New York Times by Harrison Salisbury. He said Salisburyʼs views on Soviet activity are governed by impressions gained when Salisbury covered the Stalin period. He said this is true of most American Soviet experts. He said the United States has to adjust to change in the Soviet Union and its thinking.

Pierre Salinger3



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. Secret; Eyes Only; No Other Distribution. Also sent to Rusk and Murrow.

1 See Document 151.

2 See Document 168.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.





155. Editorial Note


In a February 15, 1962, letter to Chairman Khrushchev, President Kennedy wrote that he had concluded that negotiations on Berlin would be protracted but believed that, over the longer term, agreement might still be reached. In the meantime, he argued, neither side should undertake any step which could lead to an increase in tensions over Berlin. The President also mentioned the possibility of creating an international commission with East German participation which would supervise access to Berlin. For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VI, pages 92-95.





156. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, February 16, 1962.

Soviet Foreign Policy Developments

Moscow last week made a number of diverse moves which Khrushchev probably calculates will draw the West into top-level contacts later in the year. His probable aim is to use a summit conference as the occasion for new Soviet disarmament proposals and to consider the diplomatic impasse on Berlin.

The USSR publicized the release of Francis Powers on 10 February as an effort to improve US-Soviet relations. This was followed on 11 February by Khrushchevʼs relatively moderate letter1 proposing that the heads of government—rather than the foreign ministers, as the West had suggested—meet at Geneva prior to the 18-nation disarmament conference opening on 14 March. Khrushchev retained a free hand to accept the Western proposals and press for a summit later.

At the same time, the USSR resumed pressure on the Western position in Berlin by attempting to impose temporary conditions on the use of the air corridors. This maneuver, together with Gromykoʼs adamant stand in the Moscow talks with Ambassador Thompson, suggests that Khrushchev is seeking to impress on the Western Powers that Berlin remains a potentially dangerous situation.

Khrushchevʼs Proposals

Khrushchevʼs letter of 11 February was nonpolemical and in sharp contrast to vitriolic Soviet propaganda that US policy is hypocritical. Khrushchev noted that US and Soviet “reasoning, on the whole, runs in the same direction,” and he expressed hope that the West would “rightly understand the motives which have prompted” the Soviet proposal. He went to some lengths to disclaim that his proposal was a mere propaganda gesture by admitting that participation by the heads of government was “unusual” and by claiming that he was actually drafting his proposal when the letters from President Kennedy and Prime Minister Macmillan2 were received. Moreover, he acknowledged that the heads of government could not be expected to complete a final treaty, but that their presence would provide the committee with a “powerful and correct start” and open the way for a “breakthrough in international relations.”

Khrushchevʼs immediate and tactical aim in calling for an 18-nation summit was to regain the initiative by countering the US-UK proposals. He emphasized that “direct contacts between national leaders” had become an “established international practice,” and he accepted the Presidentʼs proposals for a “broader exchange of opinions” between the heads of government. Moreover, he did not rule out acceptance of the Western proposal for a foreign ministersʼ conference to precede the Geneva meeting, stating: “It goes without saying that the foreign ministers must also take part … both with the heads of government and in the subsequent period … .”

Khrushchev specifically stated that the heads-of-government meeting he proposed should not be considered a substitute for a summit meeting “as it is generally understood.” This may foreshadow an effort to arrange a four-power summit at a later date with an agenda broader than disarmament, or to use an 18-nation heads-of-government meeting as the forum for establishing contacts with the US on other international issues, particularly Berlin.

While the release of Powers and the Khrushchev letter point toward a Soviet effort at establishing a more favorable climate for resuming top-level contacts, Khrushchev has been careful not to over-commit the USSR to a general relaxation of tensions. His letter was followed by an authoritative Pravda “Observer” article on 13 February which sharply attacked the West for proposing a foreign ministersʼ conference while preparing for a series of nuclear tests. Khrushchevʼs letter, moreover, left open the possibility that he might go to Geneva regardless of the Western position. He may view the Geneva conference as an ideal forum to project an image of greater interest in disarmament than the West, and may believe that the prospect of attendance by some neutral leaders would force a reversal by the West.

The presence of other leaders might appeal to Khrushchev if he plans to unveil some new disarmament package. His letter avoided all the substantive points raised by the President and Prime Minister Macmillan. This failure to reply, particularly on the important question of dividing disarmament into three separate categories for immediate consideration, suggests that he may initiate further correspondence on the substantive issues. Soviet diplomats in London have hinted that Moscow is considering new comprehensive disarmament proposals which would include the standard plan for complete and general disarmament plus some immediate steps in the field of European security and partial disarmament.

In an 8 February conversation with Ambassador Thompson in Moscow, the new Soviet ambassador to Washington, Anatoly Dobrynin, said that he was “not clear” concerning what the West had in mind with respect to the third disarmament category and inquired if this referred to such steps as measures “against surprise attack.” He emphasized the importance of making a start “somewhere” on the question of disarmament and expressed the belief that atomic testing would be a “good field in which to begin.” Dobrynin said that as a “layman” he could not understand why the US could not now agree to a ban on atmospheric testing without inspection and control, as it had “surely been demonstrated” that the US had the capacity of detecting atmospheric tests without control stations in the Soviet Union.

Dobryninʼs remarks suggest that theUSSR expects the test question will be raised at the 18-nation talks, despite the formal Soviet rejection of the US-UK proposal to merge the test ban question with the talks on general and complete disarmament. The USSR may be considering putting forth a formal proposal which would be restricted to a ban on atmospheric tests in line with the Kennedy-Macmillan proposal of 3 September. Soviet leaders would probably calculate that such a proposal could embarrass the West and draw considerable support from the nonaligned powers represented at Geneva.

Since the US-UK announcement of tentative plans for US atmospheric tests at Christmas Island and British underground testing in Nevada, Moscow has initiated a propaganda campaign charging that the tests are a “certainty” and accusing the West of having broken off the test ban talks to continue with its test program. A Pravda article said that the new series of Western tests “is clearly linked” with plans for making NATO a fourth nuclear power. Izvestia warned that if the West conducts nuclear tests, “the Soviet Union will have to resume testing.”

Berlin and Germany

Soviet moves to demonstrate a willingness to negotiate with the West have not been accompanied by any effort at compromise in the Thompson-Gromyko talks. While Gromyko has simply reiterated previous positions, he has not yet indicated that he is ready to break off the dialogue. The Soviet attempts this week to place temporary restrictions on Western use of the Berlin air corridors, together with the deliberate stalling in the Thompson-Gromyko talks, may be aimed at inducing the Western powers either to move directly into formal negotiations or to make concessions.

By resorting to unilateral moves in the sensitive area of access, the Soviet leaders may be attempting to demonstrate that Khrushchevʼs withdrawal of a deadline for a separate treaty should not be interpreted as an indication that Moscow will be content with the status quo in Berlin. This attitude was emphasized in a long article in a special edition of Izvestia on 11 February which accused the West of avoiding solutions of major international issues and of playing for time, particularly on the Berlin question.

Soviet interference with air access to Berlin began on 7 February when the Soviet controller at the Berlin Air Safety Center (BASC) announced that Soviet military transports would “engage” the southern air corridor from Frankfurt to Berlin at altitudes up to 7,000 feet for three and a half hours on 8 February. While it is unusual but not unprecedented for Soviet planes to conduct maneuvers in the corridors, the prior announcement and attempt to “reserve” the bulk of the corridor airspace were clearly designed to infringe on unrestricted Western access. The Soviet controller refused to file flight plans for Soviet aircraft, as is customary, and refused to guarantee flight safety for Western aircraft flying within the altitudes “engaged” by the Soviets.

The procedure was repeated for the northern and central corridors on 9 and 12 February, although on the latter date the Soviets canceled their restrictions. However, restrictions were reinstituted for 14 February, and for 15 February for the southern corridor. For the first time, the Soviets warned that if Western aircraft flew at altitudes planned for Soviet planes, this would be considered as “trespassing with resultant consequences.”

This warning was followed by a “strong protest” against alleged Western violations of established procedures and a demand that Allied flights cease unless given specific Soviet approval. These moves, together with the first deliberate harassment of incoming flights on 14 February and again on 15 February, indicated that the Soviets were carefully but deliberately raising the level of tensions. The further attempts to impose conditions on Western flights on the grounds that the Allies must have Soviet approval may have been intended as an implicit warning that the Soviets would withdraw from the four-power air safety center.



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Secret; No Further Dissemination. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 5-7 of the Weekly Review section of the issue.

1 For text, dated February 10, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. VI, pp. 87-90.

2 Dated February 7; for text, see ibid., pp. 85-87.





157. Editorial Note


In a memorandum to the President, approved at a meeting in Secretary of State Ruskʼs office on February 20, 1962, Rusk asked: “If there is no reason to believe that the Soviets will agree to a test ban of a type we deem necessary to safeguard our national security over the long run, can we risk our national security by gambling that the Soviets will parallel restraints we could unilaterally impose on ourselves? I do not personally believe we can accept this risk.” Rusk continued later in the memorandum: “My recommendation, therefore, is that you decide to order such atmospheric nuclear weapons tests as you may deem militarily necessary along lines of the program proposed.” Rusk added that “I should like to emphasize the importance of preparing our allies and friends in other parts of the world to assist us in facing up to the criticism which a test series will produce.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 319-322.





158. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, February 21, 1962, 5 p.m.

2255. Eyes only Secretary. Deptel 1937.1 I gather from Salinger memo February 12 that cold war themes are barred. Believe target should be average Soviet citizen and that problem uppermost in his mind is peace. Therefore suggest plug for disarmament might be one of main themes. Description of what could be done with savings on arms expenditure might enable President to deal both with Soviet charge that our munitions manufacturers oppose disarmament as well as to show how well off our people presently are. For example New York electrical workers now have 25-hour week; with disarmament everyone could have the same. Believe friendly tone of Adzhubei interview made great impression here and similar expression of good will would be most useful. Support for exchange program would be useful and could be peg for following line. We would like more visitors come to US not in order to try to sell them our system but to help do away with suspicion and mistrust which is greatest obstacle to peace today. Such visitors can see for themselves good will of American people and lack of any incentive on our part to expand or dominate other countries. President might say we would like to see Soviet people similarly prosper and be content as this is also in interest of peace. Should more controversial approach be permitted, President might point out that he is aware of much discussion in Soviet Union of policies of Stalin but such discussion appears to ignore Stalinʼs actions in field of foreign affairs which gave rise to much of the mistrust of Soviet Union by American people. Soviets have built up image of Roosevelt and use suitable Roosevelt quotation might be helpful.

Youth of Soviet Union is element most dissatisfied with old Communist methods and there is considerable admiration for youthful leadership in US. Therefore any statement appealing to youth would be effective.

While in short speech targets must be limited, may be opportunity to deal with one or more of strongest Soviet misconceptions about US, namely: that we are colonialist power; that higher education beyond reach of average American; that few can afford adequate medical care; that unemployed get no relief.

In making arrangements would be highly desirable to obtain commitment that prior announcement of telecast would appear in newspapers; otherwise audience here will be greatly restricted.

An alternative approach might be for President to discuss what problems we are dealing with in US—agricultural surpluses, segregation, urban renewal, automation, etc.—but am inclined to think disarmament or exchange agreement better pegs.3

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 101/2-2162. Secret.

1 Telegram 1937, February 20, asked Thompson for suggestions or points that the President might use in the television exchange with Khrushchev. (Ibid., S/S Eyes Only Microfilm Files)

2 Document 151.

3 On February 20 Rusk had also asked Kennan for his views on the television exchange. (Department of State, S/S Eyes Only Microfilm Files) In his reply Kennan suggested avoiding attacks on Khrushchev or the Soviet regime and concentrating on the U.S. desire for peace and disarmament. The President should also stress that the United States had no designs on other countries, believed in the possibility of peaceful coexistence, and realized that some important problems were probably not immediately solvable. Kennan concluded with a personal proposal for the creation of an international authority to administer matters affecting the worldʼs population such as the uses of outer space, the atmosphere, oceans, Antarctica, and migratory wildlife. (Telegram 3991 from Paris, February 23; ibid., Central Files, 611.61/2-2362)





159. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Plans and Policy of the United States Information Agency (Sorensen) to the Presidentʼs Special Counsel (Sorensen)Source


Washington, February 21, 1962.

SUBJECT

The Joint Kennedy-Khrushchev Television Appearance



The President will have the same advantages in his TV appearance with Khrushchev that he had in the Nixon debates: obvious sincerity, obvious ability, obvious youth and vigor. This appearance, then, should not be a statement or speech which incidentally is filmed but one which is skillfully produced to take full advantage of the man and the medium so as to enhance the persuasiveness of his arguments.

To this end the President should be informal, perhaps sitting in his rocking-chair in his office. He should use two or three words of Russian, and address his Soviet audience directly as “you”. He should limit his presentation to several main themes, easily repeatable by word-of-mouth (theUSSR has only a limited number of TV sets). He should be positive, not negative, and avoid making “debaterʼs points” which might put him one-up on Khrushchev but would not convince many in his audience.

To establish rapport he should make some cultural or literary reference to Russian authors or artists, and refer to his own visit to the USSR in the late 1930s. He might informally introduce his wife at the close of his remarks.

Questions and comments directed to Russian-speaking guides at our recent exhibits in the USSR provide a useful insight into the Soviet publicʼs chief concerns and misconceptions about the U.S. and its policies. Based on this experience and the advice of our demonologists, we recommend that the President emphasize: 1. The earnest desire of the U.S. for peace. We want equitable and peaceful solutions to world problems. We have never started a war and never will. We support an effective U.N. as the best hope for just and peaceful solutions to international quarrels. The President might relate Soviet suffering during World War II (“You understand what war is”) to his own war experience and injury and his brotherʼs death.

Our desire for equitable and peaceful solutions is not so much a point in itself but a thread to be woven throughout his remarks.



2. The U.S. position on: (a) Berlin. A restatement along the lines of the Presidentʼs very effective presentation to Adzhubei would be most desirable.

(b) Disarmament and nuclear testing. We invented the atom bomb and had a monopoly on it until 1949. During the time we were the only atomic power we sought to share our knowledge with the Soviet Union and others but theUSSR in 1946 rejected the Baruch Plan for turning over all our military and peaceful atomic resources to international authority. President Eisenhowerʼs 1955 “Open Skies” proposal, which would have permitted the USSR and the U.S. to keep an eye on each otherʼs military preparations, was rejected by the Soviet Union. At our initiative, talks were undertaken in Geneva in 1958 among the U.S., the USSR and Britain in an effort to agree on a treaty banning nuclear testing. We also proposed that all testing be suspended during these talks. The Soviet Union broke that moratorium by resuming atomic testing in the atmosphere in September of last year. Then the U.S. (and Britain) proposed to Khrushchev that their governments agree at once to halt atmospheric tests but the USSR turned down the offer. Later in September President Kennedy challenged the Soviet Union to a “peace race” instead of an arms race and presented to the UN a plan for “general and complete disarmament.” On October 27 the UN General Assembly, by a vote of 87 to 11, appealed to the USSR not to test a 50-megaton bomb. The Soviet Union voted against this resolution and three days later exploded the bomb.





3. The welfare base of our free enterprise (or mixed economy) system. (The average Soviet citizen thinks the American worker lives and toils in an economic jungle, unprotected from unemployment and the hazards of old age, ill health and accident. He also believes our economy is subject to regular booms and busts with the latter more frequent and longer-lasting than the former.) The American government, national and local, has a deep and abiding concern for the welfare and happiness of all its citizens. This concern dates back to the revolutionary beginnings of our republic when the new Constitution declared that providing “for the general welfare” of our citizens is a major purpose and essential function of the American Government. This was emphatically reaffirmed by President Roosevelt in the 1930s. (FYI: FDR is a favorable symbol of the U.S. in the USSR.)





Last year, the average pay of an American industrial worker was more than $420 or 378 new rubles per month. To give you a better idea of what this means, the worker was paying $8.50 (or 7 rubles, 65 kopecks) for a pair of shoes. His suit cost him $40 (or 36 rubles). He paid about $2,000 (or 1,800 rubles) for his six-passenger automobile.

Should this worker lose his job, he would receive about $150 (or 135 rubles) per month for up to nine months. However, few workers are unemployed for such a long time. The average period of unemployment in 1961 was less than four months.

When the worker retires because of old age or disability, he and his family are supported by monthly payments from a government fund to which he and his employer have contributed. This is often supplemented by further payments from his employer.

As the President told the Congress February 6,1 education “is the mainspring of our economic and social progress.” The Russians say (phonetically: “oochaynya svee-et ah niyeh oochaynya tmah” (“Education is light; ignorance is darkness”). So it is that in the U.S., every child has the right to 12 years of free education. One-fourth of all American young people between 18 and 21 are enrolled in institutions of higher learning. (Avoid use of the word “college” which is misunderstood in the USSR.)

In closing, the President might express his desire for further communication between the two nations such as that afforded by this joint TV appearance.

One obvious reminder, Ted: the Presidentʼs audience will be the whole world, including our allies and the uncommitted nations, not just the USSR and the U.S.



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, Sorensen Papers, Box 54. Secret.

1 For text of the Presidentʼs Special Message to Congress on Education, February 6, 1962, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1962, pp. 110-117.





160. National Intelligence EstimateSource


Washington, February 21, 1962.

NIE 11-5-62

POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS IN THE USSR AND THE COMMUNIST WORLD

The Problem

To examine the political situation in the USSR and the world Communist movement, particularly in the light of the XXII Party Congress and developments in the Sino-Soviet dispute, and to estimate major trends.

Principal Conclusions

A. Within the USSR, Khrushchev remains the most powerful single leader, and we believe that his leadership is not in danger at present. His control over policy, however, is subject to restraints; conservative resistance has forced him to compromise or postpone his proposals on such matters as economic policy, military force structure, and the partyʼs role in Soviet society.

B. Present trends suggest that, over the long term, popular aspirations are likely to acquire a larger influence in Soviet domestic politics. There are some prospects for further moderation of totalitarian controls; however, such a trend depends not only on social forces but also on external events and developments in top level politics.

C. Sino-Soviet relations are in a critical phase just short of an acknowledged and definitive split. There is no longer much chance of a fundamental resolution of differences. In our view, the chances that such a split can be avoided during 1962 are no better than even.1

D. The Sino-Soviet rivalry will continue to have disrupting effects upon the international Communist movement, and these will greatly intensify if a definitive split occurs. Whatever the outcome of the present Sino-Soviet crisis, we believe that the pressures for national autonomy within the international Communist movement will present the Soviet leaders with increasing difficulties, and that their control over it is likely to be further diminished.



Summary

1. The politics of the Communist world have continued in the past year to grow more complicated and more controversial. The intensity with which issues of policy and authority were posed at the XXII Congress has highlighted the contradictions which are emerging as Soviet internal development becomes more complex and as the world Communist movement becomes larger and more diverse. Adjustment to these changing conditions is made more difficult by the element of doctrinal rigidity in Communist theory and practice and by the legacy of Stalinism. (Paras. 14-17)

2. These problems do not weaken the growing material base of economic strength, scientific development, and military power which underlies the Soviet threat. Nor have they had a significant effect upon the Soviet view that the East-West conflict is a fundamental clash of systems or upon their determination to press their aims in this conflict. Present Soviet moves toward a détente in East-West relations may owe something to Moscowʼs desire to contain tensions in this area while a crisis impends in its relations with Peiping. While we perceive no indication that the Soviets are abandoning their basic hostility toward the West, there has been a shift in their tactics toward relatively greater subtlety and flexibility in pursuing their foreign policy objectives.2

3. While basic attitudes toward the West are not in dispute among the Soviet leaders, Khrushchevʼs sponsorship of successive reforms in internal policy has generated conflict with various elements which resist his changes. In the past year, differences of opinion have become evident over the important question of the relative priority of welfare programs as against the traditionally favored sectors of heavy industry and defense. Some contention has also been apparent over other issues—the proper structure of the armed forces, the role of the party apparatus in Soviet society, and the final disposition of the “antiparty group.” Even the violent onslaught against Stalin at the Congress, which Khrushchev conceived as a means of weakening the opposition to his views, failed to resolve these problems. (Paras. 18-21, 23-29)

4. We continue to believe that Khrushchev remains the most powerful single leader in Soviet politics. Most top party leaders share his general outlook, and those who resist various of his innovations do not appear to form a coherent faction which is seeking his downfall. Indeed the lineup among his colleagues probably changes from issue to issue. In addition to the difficulties of securing agreement at the top, Khrushchev in implementing his policies must rely primarily on a party bureaucracy schooled in conservatism and jealous of its traditions and privileges. In all these ways, he is subject to restraints which have the effect of slowing down the pace of his reforms. (Paras. 22, 25, 30-32)

5. The attitudes of the Soviet people, on the other hand, represent a form of largely silent pressure on the regime to proceed in the direction of further reforms of the system. The traditionally compliant attitude of the population has to some extent been upset in recent months by heightened anxiety over the possibility of war over Berlin and a related concern over the effects of international tensions on the already sagging rate of improvement in living standards. In addition, the revelations of the XXII Congress about the Stalin period and subsequent confusion within the party have led to openly expressed skepticism and to considerable ferment among intellectual circles. (Paras. 33-34)

6. We do not, however, foresee any sharp turning of the public mind toward radical solutions. Not only is the regime able to capitalize upon the strong sense of pride in national accomplishment, but the Soviet people are accustomed to authoritarian rule. Current trends suggest that, over the long term, popular aspirations are likely to acquire a larger influence, and we believe that there are some prospects for further moderation of totalitarian controls. But this will depend on external events and developments in top level politics as well as on the identifiable forces for change which are clearly now at work within Soviet society. (Paras. 35-37)

7. A far more critical question has been posed by the moves launched at the Congress against Communist Chinaʼs challenge to Soviet policies and international authority. While the condemnations of Stalin and the “antiparty group” were also conceived as part of the rebuttal to China, the main vehicle is the unremitting campaign against Albania. This Soviet attack, and the unyielding Chinese response, have moved the Sino-Soviet dispute into a critical phase just short of an acknowledged break. While substantial differences on Communist strategy divide the two, these have now been transcended by the even more fundamental question of authority, in which the USSRʼs traditional leadership of the international Communist movement is at stake. (Paras. 15, 38-39, 45)

8. Considering the conflicting views and interests of the two parties, the record of attack and counterattack, the liabilities already incurred, and the uncompromising attitude of both, we believe that there is no longer much chance of a fundamental resolution of Sino-Soviet differences. Indeed, the question now is whether Moscow and Peiping will succeed in maintaining formal unity, or whether they will take those remaining steps—undisguised accusations of heresy and the formation of separate international movements—which would constitute a definitive split. (Paras, 40-41, 46-47)

9. The considerations of self-interest which argue against such an outcome must be fully evident to both parties. On the Chinese side, however, there are important contrary factors, particularly the belief that the USSR is turning away from revolutionary aims and that Soviet policy is running counter to Chinese interests and ambitions. These considerations, plus a certain xenophobic righteousness which persuades Peiping that its policies could best carry the Bloc to victory, have already led the Chinese to sacrifice many of the advantages of the former relationship. For the Soviet part, remaining in partnership with China involves the possibility of being drawn into riskier situations than they wish to contemplate, and the probability of a continuing struggle within the movement which could lay restraints on Soviet policy and enable China to acquire an increasing authority in that movement. Thus the Soviet leaders may now be considering whether, from the standpoint of their national interests, a smaller movement in which they enjoyed undiluted predominance would not be preferable to a larger movement which they could not control. (Paras. 42-44)

10. Predictions cannot be confident, particularly since, with tensions so high, the likelihood is increased that either the USSR or China could miscalculate the otherʼs moves and reactions. In our view, however, the chances that a definitive split can be avoided during the current year are no better than even.3 If such a split should occur, diplomatic and economic ties between the USSR and China would be further reduced, though not necessarily severed. The military alliance, whether openly renounced or not, would be of doubtful value to either signatory, although each would still have a very heavy stake in the preservation of Communist power in the other. The international Communist movement would become a virtual battleground as both the Soviets and the Chinese competed for the allegiance of other parties, fostered splits in those non-bloc parties not firmly committed to one side or the other, and used all the weapons of pressure and persuasion available to them to isolate their rival. (Paras. 45, 47, 65, 75-76)

11. If no definitive split occurs, we believe that the Sino-Soviet relationship will continue to be marked by tension and instability, increasing and declining as events may occasion. In these circumstances, the disruptive consequences for the international movement will continue to be felt, although in a less intense and more manageable form than under conditions of avowed rivalry. The present lineup finds Albania and the minor parties of Asia in the Chinese camp, important elements in the Indian, Indonesian, and Japanese Parties sympathetic to Peiping, and the North Koreans and North Vietnamese seeking to maintain neutrality but edging closer to Chinese positions. Outside Asia, Soviet authority generally prevails, so far with little difficulty, against scattered pro-Chinese elements. (Paras. 48, 60, 62-64, 66-72)

12. The Chinese challenge, however, tends to undermine Soviet authority even among parties which are totally out of sympathy with Chinese views, just as Khrushchevʼs attacks on Stalin tend to becloud the legitimacy of Soviet leadership even among Communists who are not themselves Stalinists. As the international movement grows in size and diversity, as the Satellite regimes become preoccupied with national problems, as other parties acquire real prospects for sharing or even seizing state power under circumstances which have no parallel in Soviet experience, the virtue and necessity of following Soviet guidance is being increasingly questioned. In these circumstances, the Soviets are under considerable pressure to make concessions to national autonomy and to take increasing account of diverse national views in framing the general Communist line. (Paras. 15, 52, 66, 73)

13. Gradual adjustments in this direction might preserve for some time to come the essentials of Soviet leadership, were it not that China is simultaneously pressing rival policies and gaining adherents among other parties. Chinaʼs defiance dramatizes the inability of the professedly internationalist Communist ideology to preserve the unity of a movement embracing powerful nationalist forces, once the traditional sources of Soviet authority had been weakened. No clear solution to this problem is in sight, and we believe that the management of the international Communist movement will present the Soviet leaders with increasing difficulties which are likely, in one way or another, to result in a further diminution of their control over it. (Paras. 50, 74)



[Here follows a 15-page Discussion section.]



* * *



* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Intelligence Estimates. Secret. Submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by the U.S. Intelligence Board on February 21.

1 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, believes that the chances of a definitive split during 1962 are much less than even. [Footnote in the source text.]

2 Soviet policies toward the non-Communist world will be examined in a forthcoming estimate due in March 1962. Chinese policies will be discussed in NIE 13-62, “Communist China,” now scheduled for completion in April. [Footnote in the source text.]

3 See the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, footnote to paragraph C of Principal Conclusions. [Footnote in the source text.]





161. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource


Belgrade, February 22, 1962, 4 p.m.

1164. Eyes only for Secretary and President. Prior to leaving for Paris and Germany, talked again last evening for two hours with Soviet Ambassador Yepishev. Although meeting was at my initiative, it was clear he had communicated with his government in interval since we met on February 12.1 He himself said he was not speaking officially on behalf his government but also “not entirely personally”. In contrast previous occasions, his remarks struck me as of considerable interest and suggestive of changes in Soviet outlook which, if real, would be important. Highlights as follows.

1. He dealt great length and emphasis on need for improvement commercial relations between US and USSR. When I voiced skepticism as to importance this factor for either one of us, he made it clear this was conceived by them as first step to wide political rapprochement including many forms exchanges. When I asked him how he thought our specific political differences of the moment would be helped by improvement commercial relations, he said if we took correct path in this respect specific political problems would die on the vine. canʼt imagine what he could have meant by this if not Berlin. I would not attach importance to this statement if it did not represent new note in his approach and if I did not know as historian how prone Russian Communists are to regard improvement commercial relations as normal first public step toward genuine political improvement.

2. He indicated suspicion we were delaying attempt to find solutions to Soviet-Western differences in belief there might soon be internal changes in Russia which would yield advantage from our stand-point. He asserted with great vigor any such view would be wholly misconceived. Nothing of this sort was happening. Policies announced by Khrushchev represented in every respect considered views of Soviet government as whole. I told him I thought they were very wrong in suspecting we had been misled in this way.

3. He showed much interest in De Gaulleʼs proposal for preliminary four-power meeting on disarmament2 and wanted to hear my opinion of it. His government, he hinted, had come to no conclusion about it but was very interested in the proposal and thought it might have merit. I pleaded ignorance both of details proposal and of views my government.

4. He said he expected to remain Belgrade until at least March 3, when I should be back here, adding that he was not even sure he would attend Central Committee meeting March 5 at all since it would presumably deal only with agriculture. I took this as hint if I expressed desire meeting with him upon my return he would give precedence to this over Central Committee meeting.



While I do not have adequate information for judgment, point one above looks to me like attempt to convey to us that Khrushchev would be willing to permit Berlin situation to simmer down and become quiescent again but can do this only if we save his face by a general show of improvement US-Soviet bilateral relations. Reference to internal problems could be warning either that we will not do better by waiting for further internal developments within Soviet regime or that any sort of progress in our relations could be vitiated if we allow it to appear we are speculating on Soviet internal differences. I lean to first explanation.

I can be reached Saturday at General Norstadʼs headquarters and next week in care of General Landon at Wiesbaden.3

Kennan



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 601.6168/2-2262. Top Secret.

1 In the meeting on February 12 the two Ambassadors had discussed Berlin. (Telegram 1116 from Belgrade, February 13; ibid., 601.6168/2-1362)

2 For text of De Gaulleʼs letter to Khrushchev, February 18, in which he stated that France was prepared to participate in talks among the nuclear powers, see Documents on Disarmament, 1962, vol. I, pp. 48-49.

3 Lieutenant General Lauris Norstad, Supreme Allied Commander, Europe, and General Truman H. Landon, Commander in Chief, U.S. Air Force, Europe.





162. Editorial Note


Ambassador Thompson reported his analysis of Soviet intentions in Vietnam in telegram 2284 from Saigon, February 26, 1962. He stated, among other things, that “we can assume Moscow wishes avoid enlargement of hostilities into international conflict which would heighten risk of major war. In this sense Vietnam not a vital Soviet interest. However, if balance should tip in South Vietnamʼs favor, Soviets might feel obliged to redress balance through greater support of DRV: 1) to meet threat to DRV itself, and 2) to prevent Chinese from coming in in large way.” Thompson concluded that “whatever Soviet longer-range policy on Vietnam question may be I am convinced that for present they would prefer avoid any decisive actions there.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume II, pages 174-175.





163. Editorial Note


In telegram 1998 to Moscow, March 1, 1962, the Department of State instructed Ambassador Thompson to make a further démarche to Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko on the issue of Berlin. The Department noted that “although your exchanges with Gromyko seem to have reached stage of formalistic ritual we believe that you should request further meeting with him to put our further comments on record and to link discussions with possible talks at Geneva” (where Gromyko and Secretary of State Rusk would be attending disarmament talks). Thompson was also to reinforce recent Three-Power protests over harassment of Western air traffic in Berlin corridors. In telegram 2350 to the Department of State, March 6, Thompson again reported that no progress had been made in his latest meeting with Gromyko, either on the general situation in Berlin or on the new issues he had raised. For text of both telegrams, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XIV, pages 846-849 and 859-862.





164. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in YugoslaviaSource


Washington, March 2, 1962, 10:19 p.m.

901. For Ambassador Kennan. Re your 1164.1 Although we found Ambassador Yepishevʼs remarks to you on February 21 of interest, implications of what he was saying are not clear and in our estimation are not persuasive of any particular conclusions.

As regards his emphasis on improvement of commercial relations between US andUSSR, since Mikoyanʼs visit in 1959 and subsequent trips of Kozlov and Khrushchev to US, this has been frequent Soviet theme by which they are in reality talking about credits (long-term as well as short-term) to make possible kind of trade they are interested in. Lend-Lease negotiations in early 1960 made this all too clear. It is true that Soviet leaders have been and are now perhaps prone to look upon better economic relations as step toward an improvement of political atmosphere. Most notable precedent, preliminaries to Nazi-Soviet pact 1939, was example Soviet method using economic relations as beginning to political objectives. However principal political issues today, i.e., Berlin, Laos, disarmament, have already been subject of prolonged debate and negotiations between parties at interest. Moreover, we find it difficult to believe after visits of Soviet leaders here in 1959 when our position on economic relations was explained at length to them by then Under Secretary Dillon, that Soviet Government could genuinely consider it possible for legislative obstacles to improved commercial relations to be removed before an improvement in political relations had occurred by a muting of some of the sharpest international differences of today, notably Berlin.

Of course, if a settlement of major issues were reached and thereby tensions in the world lessened, there would be created a better atmosphere for increased trade. American traders would themselves be more confident in dealing with Soviet organizations and would not fear public criticism. Sustained improvement in the international climate might in due course enable us to secure modification or removal of existing legislative obstacles. But even then Soviets should recognize more than they have given indication to date inherent limitations on trade between two countries whose economies are so different and whose methods of trading so divergent. The plain fact is that the Soviets, who tend to bilateral trading relationships have relatively little to sell which is of interest to American importers.

As regards possible internal changes in Russia, you were completely correct in telling Ambassador he was wrong in suspecting us of any such attempts as he asserted. We have no reason to doubt that Khrushchev is effectively in charge of Soviet Government andCPSU and our policies are based on these realities and not on any wishful thinking or in anticipation of “advantage from our standpoint” as result of possible future Soviet internal changes.

We leave entirely in your discretion your next contact with Ambassador Yepishev. After your return to Belgrade you may wish take opportunity when you next happen to see him to comment along above lines but we see no necessity for you taking initiative to seek interview with him before March 5.

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 601.6168/2-2262. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Davis, cleared in draft with Bohlen and Kohler, in substance with Rusk, and approved by Kohler.

1 Document 161.





165. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, March 2, 1962.

Soviet Affairs

Khrushchevʼs return to Moscow may mark the end of a period in which the Soviet Union has appeared to be searching for the means to move ahead with difficult issues on both the domestic and foreign fronts. During his six-week vacation at Sochi, on the Black Sea, Khrushchev apparently readied the report he is scheduled to deliver to the central committee plenum opening on 5 March,1 at which a new program for tackling the critical agricultural problem is expected to be unveiled. There is some evidence that he also consulted at Sochi with many of his colleagues on foreign and intrabloc questions. They may also have reached a decision on the fate of Molotov and the other members of the antiparty group.

Ambassador Thompson reports that an unusual number of Soviet ambassadors have remained in Moscow, although some of them were scheduled to return to their posts some time ago. While they may be waiting for a routine briefing after Khrushchevʼs return, it is more likely that their presence is connected with a review of foreign policy questions. Among them are the ambassadors to London, Washington, Paris, and Rome; some of the ambassadors to the satellite countries are also believed to have returned to Moscow during the past several weeks. The Soviet ambassador to Laos returned unexpectedly to Moscow on 20 February, and Deputy Foreign Minister Pushkin failed to return to the Geneva conference on Laos as expected on 19 February. These developments suggest that a whole range of topics has been up for reconsideration.

Ambassador Thompson comments that Soviet foreign policy appears to be approaching a crossroads. Moscowʼs position on Vietnam, for example, will be very much influenced by the outcome of talks in Laos as well as by developments in other major East-West problems such as disarmament and Berlin. Developments in any one of these questions could affect policy toward the West as well as toward Communist China.

East-West Questions

In its relations with the Western powers, Moscow has continued to speak with an indecisive voice. On the one hand, there are signs that Soviet policies could shift to a more militant line. Khrushchev dropped his cordial tone and employed pointed criticism of US policy toward disarmament in his letter of 21 February to President Kennedy.2 He claimed the US was “not yet determined to reach agreement on questions of disarmament,” and that it had already concluded that the 18-nation disarmament committee would fail in its task. Khrushchev directly charged the US with an ulterior motive in proposing a meeting of foreign ministers at Geneva in order to “neutralize” world opinionʼs “adverse reaction to the resumption of nuclear tests by the US and UK.” The harsher Soviet tone also was contained in key speeches by Soviet military leaders on the occasion of Red Army Day.

While Khrushchev apparently is determined to gain a definite commitment from the West for a future heads of government meeting, this approach does not rule out the achievement of propaganda advantages from alleged Western disinterest in an immediate top-level meeting on disarmament. The extensive Soviet propaganda campaign, government statements and Khrushchevʼs pronouncements are designed to provide the Soviet Union with a justification for resuming its own test series at any time. As Khrushchev said in his letter: “It is clear that the Soviet Union … will not want to be left behind and will do everything to maintain its nuclear arsenal at the necessary level.”

This strident campaign for a summit has nevertheless been offset by the wide publicity given Khrushchevʼs prompt congratulations on Colonel Glennʼs successful flight and the Soviet leaderʼs offer to cooperate with the US in outer space.3 In addition, Khrushchev has left the door open for a foreign ministersʼ conference as proposed by the US and has stopped short of announcing his intention of going to Geneva regardless of Western participation—a move which would foreshadow an unabashed propaganda assault on the US. Press reports from Moscow suggest that Khrushchev will soon make his position clear in a number of speeches and pronouncements containing new versions of proposals on disarmament and European security. The scheduled World Conference on Peace and Disarmament, to be held in Moscow in July, suggests that the “peaceful coexistence” and disarmament themes will dominate the Soviet line this spring, with its predictable effect on Sino-Soviet relations.

Berlin

The summit campaign has tended to overshadow the Berlin question, but theUSSR may have reached new decisions in this area. Almost immediately after his return to Moscow, Khrushchev met for two days with an East German delegation headed by party First Secretary Walter Ulbricht. The short communiqué issued on 28 February dealt mainly with economic questions and indicated further Soviet support for the East German regime.4

On the political side, the communiqué stated only that “an exchange of opinions” occurred on the conclusion of “the German peace treaty and the normalization of the situation in West Berlin on its basis.” While this formula contains no sense of urgency and avoids any question of timing, it is likely that the Soviets and East Germans have used the meeting to coordinate a tactical line on these questions for the coming months. This meeting, in the wake of more aggressive actions affecting access to Berlin, also suggests that the bloc will begin to press forward on Berlin.

While Moscow has backed away from any showdown over Allied access, it has not abandoned its maneuvering to undermine the four-power basis for air access to Berlin. After a four-day respite, coinciding with a Soviet holiday, theUSSR resumed flights in the air corridors and continued filing specific flight plans. Employment of this tactic, rather than a return to the blanket reservations used earlier, suggests that for the present Moscow is mainly interested in keeping its position intact by periodically asserting a right to use the corridors at times and places of its own choosing.

Coincident with Bonnʼs reply to the Soviet memorandum of 27 December,5 the Soviets dispatched new notes to the three Western powers on 26 February6 protesting that the West German customs law of 1 January provided for inclusion of West Berlin in the Federal Republic customs system. This was labeled a “provocation” designed to create new difficulties in “normalizing the situation in West Berlin on the basis of conclusion of a German peace treaty.” The note included the standard claim that the extension of West German legislation to West Berlin was “absolutely illegal and beyond the competence of the Federal Republic.” The timing of these protests, after almost two monthsʼ delay, suggests that it is a further step toward driving a wedge between Bonn and its allies by raising the issue of the incompatibility of the occupation status with West German ties to Berlin.

Simultaneously, Soviet diplomats in Vienna have inspired reports in the Western press that Khrushchev is prepared to make far-reaching concessions to Adenauer if bilateral talks are arranged. The Soviet concessions would include incorporating West Berlin into the Federal Republic, establishing a corridor for access, removing Ulbricht, and eliminating the wall; in return, Bonn would sign a peace treaty, recognize East Germany, and accept the division of Berlin. Such rumors are doubtless intended to provide an incentive for Bonn to explore Soviet intentions in private talks. In the meantime, the Soviets apparently will allow the talks with Ambassador Thompson to stagnate.

Sino-Soviet Relations

The Soviet leaders may also have decided to launch a new attack against the Albanian leaders and by implication their Chinese Communist defenders. Pravda on 21 February devoted two full pages to articles and statements made several months earlier by leaders of other Communist parties “supporting” the new Soviet party program and the course established at the 22nd party congress. One of Pravdaʼs two editorials tried, by citing Engels, to rebut Chou En-laiʼs complaint that it was “un-Marxist” to attack another Communist party—the Albanians. Pravda warned that “only with open and uncompromising criticism” of Albanian leaders Hoxha and Shehu can unity of the Communist movement be preserved. This appeal, which apparently is directed at the Asian parties, directly contradicts the Chinese view that attacks on the Albanians disrupt unity. It probably is intended to prepare the way for stepped-up criticism of Tirana.

Khrushchev apparently is moving to offset Chinese influence among other parties where it is strong, and the first new step in this effort is toward Hanoi. A Soviet Communist party delegation headed by party secretary Boris Ponomarev—and including Andrey Andropov, head of the central committeeʼs department for liaison with foreign Communist parties—arrived in Hanoi on 21 February “at the invitation” of the Vietnamese. Ponomarev was active during Khrushchevʼs behind-the-scenes assault on the Rumanian party congress in June 1960 and will probably try to persuade the Vietnamese leaders to reject Maoʼs challenge to Soviet leadership of the international Communist movement and join the Soviet bloc in criticizing Albania.

The Russians are reopening the issue of factions in the international Communist movement—an issue presumably decided in favor of the Chinese at the Moscow conference of Communist parties in late 1960. A Soviet commentator on 24 February cited the British Communist partyʼs criticism of the idea of “freedom to form factions,” and Pravda on 21 February reprinted part of Leninʼs letter to the Austrian party stressing the need to accept the “international discipline of the revolutionary movement.” Khrushchev may be preparing to use the issues of factions and dogmatism, possibly in his report to the central committee plenum, as pretexts for criticizing Peiping more openly.



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Secret; Noforn. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 1-3 of the Weekly Review section of the issue.

1 For text of Khrushchevʼs report, see Pravda, March 6, 1962. For a condensed text, see Current Digest of the Soviet Press, vol. XIV, No. 8, March 21, 1962, pp. 3-17 and March 28, No. 9, pp. 3-13.

2 For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. VI, pp. 98-106.

3 For text of Khrushchevʼ;s message, February 21, see ibid., p. 96.

4 For reports of Khrushchevʼs meeting with Ulbricht, see Pravda, March 1-3, 1962, and Izvestia, March 1-2, 1962.

5 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XIV, p. 709.

6 The February 26 Soviet note was transmitted to the Department of State in telegram 2285 from Moscow, February 26. (Department of State, Central Files, 762A.34/2-2662)





166. Editorial Note


On March 2, 1962, the President delivered a major radio and television address on nuclear testing and disarmament. The United States had “long urged an effective worldwide end to nuclear tests,” Kennedy declared, and in 1958 had joined the Soviet Union in a nuclear test moratorium. The Soviet Unionʼs breaking of the moratorium in September 1961, however, had prompted his decision soon after to resume underground tests and to begin preparations for atmospheric tests. On March 2, following a careful review of the subject by the National Security Council, he authorized the Atomic Energy Commission and the Department of Defense to conduct a series of atmospheric tests, beginning when preparations were completed in the latter part of April and to be concluded as quickly as possible, within 2 to 3 months. Such series, involving only those tests which could not be held underground, would take place in the atmosphere over the Pacific Ocean. For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1962, pages 186-192.





167. Salinger Diary EntrySource


Washington, March 6, 1962.

The President and Sorensen thought it would be a good idea to put Mrs. Kennedy and Mrs. Khrushchev on the TV program. I was instructed to call Bolshakov—which I did—and asked if this would be possible. Bolshakov told me I had reached him at home where he was sick in bed. He said he throught it was a good idea and would transmit it immediately to Mikhail Khalarmov.

A half hour later Bolshakov called me back to say it was urgent that he see me. I made an appointment to see him at 6:45 p.m. in the Hay-Adams Hotel bar. By coincidence Bob Manning was in the bar with Bruce Rothwell of the London Daily Mail, Adalbert de Segonzac of France Soire, and Werner Imhoof of the Swiss Neue Zuercher Zeitung. They observed Bolshakov and I entering the bar together.

Bolshakov said he was about to transmit my message to Moscow when he received a message from Moscow saying the Soviet Government no longer thought the time was propitious for a Kennedy/Khrushchev TV exchange. He said the Presidentʼs decision to resume nuclear testing1 had caused the Soviet Government to defer the program to a later date; that the Soviet people would not understand why Chairman Khrushchev appeared with the President in view of the latterʼs testing decision. Bolshakov said this development did not affect my trip to the Soviet Union.

I told Bolshakov I considered the decision most unfortunate; that I could not see how the decision could not but affect my trip; that it was a personal blow to the President as well as for me; that, on the contrary, that in these difficult times we should strive, in communications, to keep the lines open; it was always most essential to communicate when our relations were improved. I told Bolshakov I could not believe that he himself agreed with the Soviet Government decision and I did not think there was anybody in the high ranks of the Soviet Government who was naive enough to think that we would not test. I said Mr. Khrushchev himself had made the statement that after the first country tested it was natural to expect the other country to test.

Mr. Bolshakov said he was sorry about it and that we had already accomplished a great deal in communications. I told Bolshakov that I had been able to say, since January 20, 1961, that every commitment made with a Soviet official regarding communications had been carried out to the fullest extreme; that I had staked my personal reputation on Adzhubeiʼs commitment to interview the President. I told Bolshakov I could now no longer make this claim. Mr. Bolshakov was obviously upset about the Soviet decision but did not enter much into the conversation.

I left the Hay-Adams and returned to the White House where I reported to the President, who was alone in the office. He immediately called Sorensen who had prepared the draft TV remarks. The President told me to call Bolshakov back and tell him this was another manifestation as to why it was so difficult to come to any agreement with the Russians; that this particular decision was as if Khrushchev had arranged for a Summit with the President and then cancelled out two days prior to [it] because of some change in the political climate. The first thought the President had was that I should immediately announce cancellation of my Moscow trip in retaliation. On second thought he said we would not do this because to do so would reduce the climate of American-Soviet relations to an even lower point than now existed.

The President called Chip Bohlen and informed him of the Soviet decision; Bohlen suggested that it be made to appear as a joint one. I was thereupon instructed to call Bolshakov back and tell him of the Presidentʼs displeasure; point out the difficulties with our own press because of the great many people who knew of this matter, particularly the network heads; without further raising of tensions between the Soviet Union and the United States we would attempt to play down the decision. This I did.



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, Salinger Papers, Box 144, Visits. Secret.

1 See Document 166.





168. Editorial Note


On January 31, 1962, negotiations for a new U.S.-Soviet exchanges agreement began in Washington. The U.S. delegation was headed by the Secretary of Stateʼs Special Assistant, Charles E. Bohlen, and the Soviet delegation by S.K. Romanovsky, Deputy Chairman of the Soviet Committee for Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries. Following prepared statements by the heads of delegation at the first plenary meeting on January 31 and comments by each delegation on the draft agreement submitted by the other on February 1, the delegations then split into four committees devoted to general sections, scientific exchanges, performing arts, and educational exchanges. As the talks progressed smaller meetings between Bohlen and Romanovsky occurred when discussion of particular topics threatened to bring a halt to the negotiations. In general the U.S. delegation tried to expand the number of exchanges in the educational and informational fields, while the Soviet side attempted to increase the numbers of exchanges in the scientific and industrial areas.

By February 23 the discussions had progressed sufficiently far to warrant the establishment of a drafting committee charged with preparing a paper that showed what had been agreed and what remained to be resolved. Following this meeting the delegations were able to reach agreement on all aspects of the text and at their eleventh session on March 8, the drafting committee compared the English and Russian texts and signed the agreement. For text of the agreement including the annexes, see 13 UST 1496; for text of the agreement without the annexes, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pages 726-740. Records of the plenary and committee meetings of the negotiations are in Department of State, Central File 511.613.





169. Editorial Note


In a March 9, 1962, memorandum to Secretary of State Rusk, President Kennedy provided instructions for Ruskʼs upcoming meetings with Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko in Geneva. “With particular regard to Berlin,” the President stated, “you should attempt to develop in your discussions with Gromyko the draft proposal of a modus vivendi which has my approval.” The draft modus vivendi to which the President referred called for agreement by the Soviets to the general principle that “West Berlin should be free to choose its own way of life, that its viability should be maintained, and that its access should remain free and unhindered.” It also called for further negotiations at the level of deputy foreign minister and maintenance, for the time being, of current access procedures. For text of the Presidentʼs memorandum and the draft modus vivendi, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XV, pages 1-6. Rusk met with Gromyko while in Geneva March 10-27 for the meeting of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament, March 14-June 14.

In a March 10 letter to President Kennedy responding to Kennedyʼs letter of February 15 (see Document 155), Chairman Khrushchev stated that the Soviet Government was “prepared to meet halfway the desire expressed by you and to agree to the creation of a special international organ on the access to West Berlin.” Khrushchev continued, “The organ that I have in mind would act as an arbiter if difficulties appeared during the practical implementation of the agreements on free access to and from West Berlin. It would not be empowered with any administrative functions which would give it authority to directly regulate traffic or set its own regulations on the traffic routes connecting West Berlin with the outside world because this is a prerogative of the German Democratic Republic.” Khrushchev indicated that Soviet agreement on creation of such an organ would come only in the context of an agreement to demilitarize Berlin and on “final legalization and consolidation of the existing German borders and also on other questions which are well known to you and which you mention in your message.” Khrushchev added that “symbolic contingents” of UN or neutral country troops could be stationed in West Berlin for 3-5 years. In telegram CAP 5114-52 to Secretary of State Rusk, March 11, the President commented that Khrushchevʼs “proposal of an international organ on access, though at present attached to a quite unacceptable condition, does offer a real chance of progress.” For text of Khrushchevʼs letter and Kennedyʼs telegram, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XV, pages 7-16.

On March 12 Rusk, meeting with Gromyko in Geneva, raised for the first time with a Soviet representative the idea of an agreement on general principles along the lines suggested in the draft modus vivendi. According to the memorandum of conversation, Gromyko noted that the proposal was “something new, at least in form,” and “he did not exclude the possibility of first reaching agreement on a set of general principles, then gradually developing those principles, and ultimately reaching agreement on a detailed basis.” For text, see ibid., pages 26-33.





170. Paper Prepared by the Secretary of Stateʼs Special Assistant (Bohlen)Source


Washington, undated.

SOVIET MOTIVATIONS IN CANCELLATION OF TV EXCHANGE

1. In matters of this kind, the Soviet Union is not animated by any of the normal personal considerations which might seem to us to be involved. The Soviets undoubtedly consider that the time is not propitious in large measure because of their propaganda reaction to our announcement of resumption of tests. They undoubtedly feel it would be quite incompatible at a time when Soviet propaganda was denouncing the Presidentʼs speech as “aggressive” or “atomic blackmail” to have an exchange of television programs between the President and Khrushchev.

2. I would seriously doubt if there was any intention of affronting the President if only because the agreement on this exchange has never been made official, and from the Soviet side, there has been no leak at all. The leaks from our side are, as you know, something they have complained about. But, it does not fall in the category, in their eyes, of the renunciation of something that was officially announced.

3. As additional proof that Khrushchev was not seeking to rebuff the President, is the fact that he is clearly directing his policy towards bringing about a Summit meeting at Geneva. It is likewise clear that the only person that he wishes to meet and talk to is the President, since the Soviet Union is only always interested in going where the power is, and, on the nuclear subject, there is only really one other nuclear power, namely the United States. It would hardly make sense for Khrushchev avidly to seek a meeting with the President on the one hand and on the other to go out of his way to affront the President personally.

4. In short, given the fact of no announcement of the agreement, the Soviet response to our resumption of testing, I think the Soviet suggestion to call it off for the time being is quite sensible, and a further illustration of the lack of considerations in the carrying out of their policies—to which we perhaps attach greater importance. On policy matters, the Soviet Government operates like a machine, regardless of any personal considerations.





* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR, Adzhubei Visit. Secret; Eyes Only. The source text is attached to a March 9 memorandum of transmittal from Bohlen to Bundy, which stated that it was a response to an inquiry by Bundy and that because of the sensitivity of the subject, he was not sending it through the usual channels.





171. Editorial Note


In Geneva on March 19, 1962, Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko handed Secretary of State Rusk a paper containing nine principles for negotiations on Berlin that the former had drafted in response to their discussion on March 12 (see Document 169). Rusk reported on the meeting in telegram Secto 65 to the Department of State, March 19, noting that “although some formulations are new and relate to our previous discussions, paper as whole is essentially restatement in guise of principles of basic Soviet position on Germany and Berlin it has developed over past three and one-half years.” For text of telegram Secto 65, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XV, pages 48-50.

The following day Gromyko argued in a discussion with Rusk, as recorded in the memorandum of conversation, that a solution to the Berlin issue “would provide for: (1) a German peace treaty—perhaps without Western participation, which would be regrettable; (2) a change in the abnormal situation in West Berlin, a situation which had ensued from Germanyʼs surrender; and (3) a change in the situation with regard to respect for the sovereignty of the GDR, which was now quite intolerable.” Rusk later in the discussion explained the “vital interests” of the United States: “(1) our presence in West Berlin; (2) freedom of access as it had been understood for many years; and (3) freedom of West Berlin to choose its own way of life.” For text, see ibid., 51-60.

In further conversation on March 22, Rusk proposed that the two sides consider acknowledging that they were unlikely to reach agreement on Berlin soon and “see how disagreement should be handled.” Gromyko did not address the proposal directly, rather emphasizing continuing Soviet patience in the effort to reach an “understanding.” Yet another discussion on March 26 led to no progress. For text of the memoranda of conversation, see ibid., pages 61-69 and 76-89. In telegram Secto 113 to the Department of State, March 26, reporting his “summary reactions” to his talks with Gromyko in Geneva, Rusk stated that the “Soviets have not changed their proposals in any significant way since Vienna summit.” Gromyko had nevertheless “carefully avoided threat and bluster on the one hand and any temptation to declare an impasse on the other.” The Soviets “clearly left the impression that they wished to continue talks on a bilateral basis and are flexible as to exact means.” For text, see ibid., pages 91-92.





172. Editorial Note


National Intelligence Estimate 85-62, “The Situation and Prospects in Cuba,” issued on March 21, 1962, included the intelligence communityʼs view that Cuban military capabilities were “essentially defensive. We believe it unlikely that the Bloc will provide Cuba with strategic weapon systems or with air and naval capabilities suitable for major independent military operations overseas. We also believe it unlikely that the Bloc will station in Cuba combat units of any description, at least for the period of this estimate [“over the next year or so”]. This attitude will not preclude the liberal provision of Bloc advisers, instructors, and service personnel, the provision of such defensive weapons and equipment as surface-to-air missiles and radars, and such improvement of Cuban naval and air facilities as would enable them to service Soviet units.” For text of the estimateʼs summary and conclusions, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume X, pages 772-776.

Three weeks later, on April 10, the Chairman of the Board of National Estimates, Sherman Kent, forwarded to Director of Central Intelligence McCone an estimate on “Probable Reactions to a US Military Intervention in Cuba.” Among other things, the estimate expressed the view that the “USSR would have no means to intervene effectively in Cuba with its own forces, and almost certainly would not resort to general war for the sake of the Castro regime. However, the USSR would exert every means of political and psychological pressure at its disposal to procure a universal condemnation of US aggression against Cuba, and, if possible, a restoration of the status quo ante. To this end, it might make threatening references to Soviet missile power. Communist China and other Bloc states would support these Soviet efforts. In the circumstances, there would probably be a first-class war scare, with panic among the neutralists and a high state of alarm in NATO.” For text, see ibid., pages 783-785.





173. Editorial Note


On March 28, 1962, during a National Security Council meeting, Secretary of State Rusk reported to the President on the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Conference still underway in Geneva. According to the minutes of the meeting, Rusk stated that “on testing, it was utterly clear that the Soviets would accept no inspection in the USSR, in any way, shape or form. They had made this position plain in public and in private; Gromyko had told the Secretary privately that even one foreigner loose in the Soviet Union could find things out that would be most damaging to the USSR. There seemed no room to negotiate on this point.” Turning to the problem of general disarmament, Rusk said that “the Soviets had brought in a complete treaty covering complete disarmament by stages. But the Soviet position clearly allows only for inspection of disarmament and not for retained armaments.” For text of the minutes, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 411-414.





174. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, March 30, 1962.

SUBJECT

Presentation of Letters of Credence by New Soviet Ambassador



PARTICIPANTS

The President

Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, The Soviet Ambassador

Angier B. Duke, Chief of Protocol

Richard H. Davis, Deputy Assistant Secretary for European Affairs



At 12:30 today the President received the new Soviet Ambassador, Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, for presentation of his letters of credence. During the meeting, which lasted about fifteen minutes, only three matters of substance were touched upon.

Ambassador Dobrynin remarked he had seen Chairman Khrushchev before his departure from Moscow and that the Chairman had asked him to convey his best wishes to the President. The President thanked him and then remarked with regard to Laos that he considered the agreement reached with Chairman Khrushchev at Vienna on this subject as still valid; that we had been trying, not entirely with complete success, to achieve a Laos settlement along the lines of that agreement; that Ambassador Harriman had recently had some intensive discussions in Laos to this end and that it was important that during our efforts to achieve a final settlement, the cease-fire should be observed. Ambassador Dobrynin assured the President that the Soviet Government considered the Vienna agreement on Laos still valid.

The President said that he thought his views on meeting at the summit were well known; that summit meetings where four or five were involved were complicated matters; that people expected from a summit meeting some positive accord. On the other hand, the President continued, it was possible in informal meetings such as at Vienna to exchange views and it was not necessary to expect that any agreement or accord on specific matters come from such informal meetings. The Ambassador said that he understood the Presidentʼs views on this question.

With regard to the postponement of the exchange of television interviews, the President expressed the hope that the near future might bring an opportune moment to revive the exchange to which the Ambassador assented.



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series,USSR, Dobrynin Talks. Confidential. No drafting information appears on the source text, but it was approved in the White House on April 9. Another copy of this memorandum is in Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. For Dobryninʼs recollection of this meeting, see his memoir, In Confidence: Moscowʼs Ambassador to Americaʼs Six Cold War Presidents, pp. 58-59. Memoranda of Dobryninʼs initial calls on Acting Secretary of State Ball on March 21 and Secretary of State Rusk on March 29, are in Department of State, Secretaryʼs Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330.





175. Memorandum From the Ambassador to the Soviet Union (Thompson) to Secretary of State RuskSource


Washington, April 3, 1962.

I believe we should work toward another meeting between the President and Mr. Khrushchev, either in connection with a summit or bilaterally for the following reasons:1

Our two principal problems with the Soviets are Berlin and disarmament. I believe these are somewhat connected in Soviet thinking. A Berlin settlement would facilitate progress in disarmament and one of the reasons Khrushchev may be holding off on Berlin is to see whether or not there is any real prospect of meaningful disarmament measures. In any event progress in disarmament would also facilitate a Berlin settlement. While I continue to believe that a real settlement of the Berlin question is not now possible I think that if Khrushchev thought the prospects in the field of disarmament were good, we could reach agreement with him on some kind of modus vivendi for Berlin. It seems to me that continuance of the present situation of Soviet harassment and attempts to erode our position in Berlin is very dangerous and could easily lead to a situation where communication between us would become impossible. If the Soviets proceed with the signature of their separate peace treaty without a prior understanding with us the situation will become even more dangerous. I believe therefore that we should proceed promptly to get out of the present impasse.

Given the situation within the Soviet Union Khrushchev should want—rather desperately—to at least stop the increase in arms expenditure and if possible to reduce this burden drastically. It is clear that he is in deep trouble with the Soviet agricultural situation and will need to make heavy direct investments in this area as well as to increase production of consumers goods to provide needed incentives both in agriculture and industry. The problem is from what area can he take these measures. Housing is already behind plan and the pressure is already strong in this field. A cutback in heavy industry would encounter strong internal opposition and would mean giving up the goals of the seven-year plan. Foreign aid and space programs would be difficult to cut back and would probably not be sufficient. The only area where the cuts could be made without causing serious internal difficulties is that of military expenditures.

I believe that when they have seriously considered our proposal of a 30% cut combined with a sampling technique, the Soviets will be very much attracted to the possibilities it offers toward the solution of their problems. The greatest opposition would come from the Soviet military and their strongest argument is probably that even with sampling we would uncover their weaknesses and be able to fix targets with sufficient accuracy that we would be tempted either to launch a first strike or make political demands based upon a “position of strength.”

In these circumstances I believe that the disclosure to Khrushchev of our present intelligence capability could be the item which could tip the scale both in disarmament and Berlin. The pros and cons of this action would have to be carefully examined. I understand that the military and CIA are strongly opposed particularly to revealing the extent of resolution of our photography but I do not believe this would be necessary. I suggest that the President should see Khrushchev with only an interpreter present and should relate the disclosure solely to disarmament and not to the Berlin question. He could pick an area where the Soviets would know there had been no U-2 flights or visits from our attaches. He could produce maps showing targets in that area and drawings of military and particularly of missile installations. An alternative might be to show Khrushchev similar information about Communist Chinese atomic and missile developments. It would be helpful if in the conversation it could be brought out that our decision to stand firm on Berlin antedated this intelligence capability.

I have an appointment to see the President on Friday at 10:30 and if you agree I would propose to talk to him along these lines.2



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/4-362. Top Secret. Drafted by Thompson and sent to Rusk through Kohler. On April 3 Thompson, who was in Washington for consultations, also briefed the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on recent developments in the Soviet Union. Although stating that any predictions about the Soviets were dangerous, he expressed personal optimism about relations between the two countries, leaving aside only the Berlin question. The Ambassador added that the two most difficult problems for Khrushchev were agriculture and the dispute with the Chinese, which he believed was deepening. For text of his briefing and replies to questions from the committee, see Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, 1962, pp. 359-380.

1 Next to this paragraph in the source text Rusk wrote “if some prospect of success.”

2 The source text bears an “OK DR”, but other than an entry in the Presidentʼs log, no record of his meeting with Thompson at 10:30 a.m., April 6, has been found.





176. Editorial Note


In an April 4, 1962, memorandum to President Kennedy, Ambassador to India John Kenneth Galbraith urged that Assistant Secretary of State Harriman “be instructed to approach the Russians to express our concern about the increasingly dangerous situation that the Viet Cong is forcing in Southeast Asia. They should be told of our determination not to let the Viet Cong overthrow the present government while at the same time to look without relish on the dangers that this military build-up is causing in the area. The Soviets should be asked to ascertain whether Hanoi can and will call off the Viet Cong activity in return for phased American withdrawal, liberalization in the trade relations between the two parts of the country and general and non-specific agreement to talk about reunification after some period of tranquillity.” In a memorandum to the President dated the same day, Ambassador at Large Chester Bowles recommended that the U.S. “make known through a third party our willingness to negotiate with the Russians or others” on the basis of “specific political terms” that were “acceptable to us and to South Vietnam.” For text of both memoranda, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume II, pages 297-303.





177. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, April 6, 1962.

Soviet Foreign Policy Developments

Moscow continues to evince interest in further high-level negotiations with the United States on the Berlin problem and to avoid actions which might lead to a confrontation with the West. The suspension of Soviet flights in the air corridors after 29 March apparently is intended to appear responsive to President Kennedyʼs press conference remarks that day welcoming the “care” with which the Soviets are proceeding on Berlin.1 The lull, however, probably does not indicate a decision to terminate these flights but suggests that Moscowʼs actions will be restrained, at least pending further developments in negotiations. The USSR has shifted its attention to efforts to restrict and erode Western rights in ground travel to and within Berlin and to curtail or terminate the Western Military Liaison Missions in East Germany.

Moscowʼs treatment of the Rusk-Gromyko talks at Geneva has featured reports from US papers which are said to have emphasized the fact that the two major powers agreed to continue negotiations on the German problem through normal diplomatic channels. Moscow TASS, in its brief coverage of the 29 March news conference, carefully noted President Kennedyʼs remarks on Berlin concerning the “urgency and importance of this problem” and his assertion that the US “wants to have these talks in order to avoid a dangerous situation.”

Although there has been no further elaboration by the bloc on its proposal for the creation of a four-power “arbitration agency” to ensure Western access to West Berlin, East European satellite representatives are reportedly actively seeking neutralist support for the proposal. [3 lines of 2-column source text not declassified] several East European embassies have recently approached the Indian Government in the hopes of obtaining a favorable endorsement of the Communist proposal. The Czech representative even suggested that Indian troops might be stationed in Berlin in place of Soviet and American troops. The bloc has made it clear, however, that any Berlin settlement must also recognize the termination of existing Western occupation rights. A 4 April Pravda attack on the US radio station in West Berlin (RIAS) may signal more direct Soviet propaganda attacks against the Westʼs occupation status in West Berlin.

The pattern of Soviet flights in the air corridors over the past three weeks suggests that Moscow is satisfied with the limited gains achieved thus far and does not contemplate any major new moves on air access in the near future. Soviet tactics in the corridors from the start have been closely linked with Moscowʼs broader objective of obtaining some sort of new settlement on the status of West Berlin and access to the city which could be interpreted as de facto Western recognition of East German sovereignty. Toward this end Moscow sought to establish its right to use the corridors on a basis of complete equality with the West and consequently to undermine the original purpose of the corridors as channels for unrestricted Western access.

The Soviets apparently believe that if they can extend bloc control in the corridors and bring air access procedures more into line with those involved in ground access, the bloc will be in a stronger bargaining position for demanding new access arrangements which would “respect” East German sovereignty. Soviet activities both in the air corridors and on the ground routes are also aimed at preparing for an eventual transfer to the East Germans of controls over all forms of access.

Recent Soviet moves involving the US and British Military Liaison Missions in East Germany may reflect a desire to terminate the missions altogether, in line with the Soviet contention that they are anachronisms left over from the period of the military occupation of Germany. The Soviets have rescinded their order placing the chief of the US Military Liaison Mission (USMLM) in Potsdam under virtual house arrest and are again allowing USMLM personnel free travel to and from West Berlin. The official East German news agency, however, announced earlier that USMLM personnel will not be allowed to travel in East Germany without the express approval of the Soviet authorities. Soviet Marshal Konev has rejected Allied protests over the treatment of mission personnel by the East German police, and may attempt to impose even sharper restrictions on mission activities. The Soviets apparently hope to force the US to withdraw its missions. Alternatively, theUSSR could propose to the three Western powers the termination of all four missions and unilaterally withdraw the Soviet mission from Frankfurt.

In a further effort to test Western reaction to their new customs law prior to its full implementation—reportedly on 30 April—the East Germans have apparently decided to introduce new crossing procedures on the East-West Berlin sector borders. On 2 April, long-term entry passes held by numerous individuals engaged in interzonal trade and by West Berliners working in East Berlin were taken up, and the holders were advised to secure new passes. The East Germans are reliably reported to have assured a West German trade official that the new customs law will not affect interzonal trade or trade between West Berlin and West Germany, but they may be laying the groundwork for separating West Berlin commercial contacts with East Germany from those between East and West Germany.

Disarmament and Test Ban

Since the departure of the foreign ministers from Geneva, the nuclear test ban issue has continued to predominate, and the general disarmament discussions have been marked by procedural wranglings. During the Big Three subcommittee discussions of the test ban issue, Soviet delegates have continued to reiterate the standard argument that a test ban agreement is possible only on the basis of the 28 November Soviet draft proposal,2 which amounts to a self-policed test ban.

[3 paragraphs (1 column of 2-column source text) not declassified]

On 3 April Moscow issued another formal pronouncement warning that if Western nuclear testing continues, the USSR “will be compelled to hold tests of new types of nuclear weapons” to strengthen its security and safeguard universal peace. This latest warning—contained in a government note3 to the UN disarmament commission—added that the holding of US atmospheric tests will inevitably give a “new impetus” to the perfection of mass destruction weapons.

In a further attempt to justify an eventual Soviet test resumption, the Soviet press has distorted recent statements by President Kennedy—commenting on possible US use of nuclear weapons in a hypothetical situation in which Soviet conventional forces would be overrunning Western Europe—to imply that the President had advocated preventive war. Pravda went beyond Moscowʼs usual line—which consistently denounces the Pentagon and US “militarists,” but generally stops short of implicating the President personally—and remarked that “it seems that the President is himself taking the position of the most belligerent part of the Pentagon brass.”

The criticism was diluted somewhat by the interjection of bitter side attacks on US “monopolist” and “militarist” circles. The Soviets were also careful not to imply that the President himself no longer advocated peaceful settlement of outstanding East-West issues, such as Berlin and Germany.



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Top Secret; [codeword not declassified]; Noforn. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 1-3 of the Weekly Review section of the issue.

1 For text of the Presidentʼs news conference, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1962, pp. 271-278.

2 For text, see Documents on Disarmament, 1961, p. 664.

3 For text, see Pravda, April 4, 1962.





178. Editorial Note


According to the minutes of a White House meeting on April 6, 1962, Secretary of State Rusk told President Kennedy that “there was an urgent need to provide the U.S. delegation at Geneva with an outline of our proposed treaty for general and complete disarmament. He noted that the Soviet delegation had already tabled a draft treaty and that there was considerable pressure on our delegation to begin a detailed discussion of the Soviet document.” The President asked “why it was that we were not further along with the treaty draft at this point since we presumably had been working on it for the past several months.” William Foster, Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, replied that “the most basic substantive issue to be resolved was the manner in which reductions of armaments and limitations on production could be controlled.” The President asked that a small interagency task force be formed to prepare a final draft of the treaty. For text of the minutes, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 422-425.





179. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, April 6, 1962.

SUBJECT

Soviet Interpretation of U.S. Policy



PARTICIPANTS

Anatoli Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador

Llewellyn E. Thompson, American Ambassador to Moscow



At a luncheon conversation today Dobrynin raised the question of the Alsop article and the stir this had caused in Moscow.1 He said they had been particularly upset about the timing of the article. I explained that the Saturday Evening Post had a lead time of, I thought, something in the neighborhood of five weeks. He said he thought that surely in an article of this importance the article could have been changed in order not to be related to the discussions of the Berlin problem. I said I was sure that this was not possible since the Post was published in millions of copies and I also felt certain that no one had really considered at the time the interview was given what the situation might be at the time it was published. I explained that the way these things usually work, as far as I understand them, was that the President would give an interview and that the text might be checked by the Presidentʼs staff in the White House, but probably not by him personally.

I expressed the opinion that one of our difficulties in relations between the United States and the Soviet Union was their tendency to read into press stories policy indications that were actually non-existent. Dobrynin said that he knew of the frequent and close contact the President had with the press, and he was therefore inclined to take press stories as much more indicative of the Presidentʼs policy than was the case with President Eisenhower. I pointed out that there were a great many people who talked to the press besides the President and that this tendency to read Government policy implications into press stories was a great mistake, since a great many press stories had absolutely no relation to government policy.

I said I thought there was one area in which he could greatly improve over previous practice, and that was that when he was in doubt about what some press story or government action meant, he should contact appropriate officials in the State Department and informally get their opinions. I said that, from my observations, the Soviets tended to read into instances policy implications which did not exist, and that very often there was a simple explanation which our people will be glad to give him. He expressed surprise that he could ask for this kind of information and said he was somewhat put off by the fact that every time he called at the State Department, it turned out to be a big operation with the press waiting for him when he left. I explained that this was inevitable but that there was no need for him to make any substantive comment and that, after a while, the press would become used to this, although they would always be there in case he had something to say.2



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.00/4-662. Confidential. Drafted by Thompson on April 9.

1 “Kennedyʼs Grand Strategy,” Saturday Evening Post, March 31, 1962. In this article Stewart Alsop, basing his remarks on an interview with the President, wrote that in some circumstances the United States might employ a first strike.

2 During the luncheon conversation Dobrynin also asked Thompsonʼs advice about contacts with the Department of State, Congress, and the Cabinet and compared various aspects of the Department of State and the Soviet Foreign Ministry. Memoranda of these conversations are in Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/4-662.





180. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, April 13, 1962.

Soviet Foreign Policy Developments

[Here follows a section on Berlin and Germany.]

Disarmament and Test Ban

The Soviet press and radio promptly denounced the 10 April joint US-British statement1 on a nuclear test ban as a “face-saving maneuver” issued at a time when the US is completing preparations for atmospheric tests. A 12 April Pravda article termed it an “ultimatum” and “typical nuclear blackmail.” At the 12 April session of the Geneva disarmament conference, Soviet chief delegate Zorin similarly denounced the joint statement and pledged that the USSR would not stage tests during the disarmament negotiations if the West would make a similar pledge. There have been indications that the Soviets might follow this bid for a test moratorium with a proposal ostensibly designed to break the impasse over international controls to monitor a test ban.

Soviet representatives at Geneva recently have hinted at the possibility of some agreement in principle to international controls over a test ban. [15 lines of 2-column source text not declassified]

The USSR probably expects that the US will resume testing, and the advanced state of readiness of the Soviet test site at Novaya Zemlya suggests that the Soviets will do likewise after the first few US explosions and the anticipated neutralist condemnation. Soviet delegate Tsarapkin at the disarmament conference and Khrushchev in a recent letter to the Japanese prime minister have reiterated the standard argument that US control proposals for a test ban would amount to an “espionage network” on Soviet territory.

The Soviet delegation at Geneva has continued to seek to present the USSR as the champion of general and complete disarmament and to maintain publicly that a test ban agreement is possible only under the terms of the Soviet November 1961 draft treaty, which excludes international controls.

The Soviets are also attempting to impress the neutralist delegations with their stand on partial disarmament measures. In urging the adoption of the Soviet draft on banning war propaganda, Zorin charged that the US has systematically suppressed peace propaganda and outlawed a number of organizations in favor of peace. The Soviets have capitalized on the fact that the US has not yet presented a draft treaty on general and complete disarmament, and neutralist delegations are reportedly surprised at US failure to do so and are voicing suspicions that the US does not want to present any general disarmament proposals, “despite many official US statements supporting this goal.”



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Top Secret; [codeword not declassified]; Noforn. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 2-3 of the Weekly Review section of the issue.

1 On April 9 the U.S. and U.K. Governments sent a joint statement on nuclear testing to the Soviet Government that reiterated their view that international inspection or verification inside the Soviet Union was required in any nuclear test ban treaty in order to determine the nature of unexplained seismic events which might be nuclear tests. For text, see Documents on Disarmament, 1962, vol. I, pp. 292-293.





181. Editorial Note


During 1961 and 1962, Kennedy administration officials became increasingly concerned about a possible arms race in outer space. On September 25, 1961, for instance, President Kennedy proposed in an address before the UN General Assembly “keeping nuclear weapons from seeding new battlegrounds in outer space” and extending the rule of law on earth “to manʼs new domain—outer space.” (Documents on Disarmament, 1961, pages 470-471) The U.S. treaty outline on general and comprehensive disarmament, submitted to the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee on April 18, 1962, proposed that the parties to the treaty “agree not to place in orbit weapons capable of producing mass destruction.” (Ibid., 1962, volume I, page 360) For information on subsequent measures concerning a possible arms race with the Soviet Union in outer space and relevant documentation, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 563-565.





182. Editorial Note


At a meeting of the National Security Council on April 18, 1962, the President approved the nuclear atmospheric test series proposed by the Department of Defense and the Atomic Energy Commission for the spring of 1962. The resulting test series, called Dominic I, ultimately consisted of 36 detonations held in the Pacific Ocean area from April 25 to November 3, 1962. The first 27 were held in the vicinity of Christmas Island in the spring and summer. The remaining 9 tests, approved by President Kennedy at a meeting of the National Security Council on September 6, were conducted in the Johnston Island area in the fall. The Soviet Union resumed atmospheric nuclear testing in early August 1962. For further information, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 439-442 and 566-568.





183. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, April 20, 1962.

Khrushchev and the Soviet Leadership

Khrushchev, who was 68 years old this week, appears to be in generally fair health, but there are signs that advancing age and the rigors of high office have begun to slow him down. During each of the past three winters, for example, his heavy schedule has left him visibly fatigued and susceptible to respiratory infections. At least one bout with influenza followed by a long recuperative vacation on the Black Sea has become an annual event. He was ill with flu in early January of this year, and evidently had another attack in April which necessitated a postponement of the opening Supreme Soviet session from 10 to 23 April.

Khrushchev has a history of other medical problems which are at least a potential source of concern. He is dangerously heavy, for instance: only five feet, five inches tall, he weighs about 220 pounds and measures 49 inches around the waist. For some years he has had kidney trouble, and there are numerous reports that he suffers from high blood pressure and a liver ailment. He does not appear to be particularly respectful of professional medical advice.

The other leaders carry on quietly during Khrushchevʼs extended absences from Moscow, and as yet there has not been any noticeable increase in political maneuvering within the party presidium in preparation for a succession crisis. Khrushchev himself gives every indication of being in full command; speculation that he is still involved in a fight to maintain his position seems to be unfounded. However, there probably continue to be disagreements within the hierarchy over such questions as the proportion of economic resources that should be devoted to consumer goods and the pace and extent of liberalization in the wake of renewed attacks against Stalin.

When Khrushchev is away from the capital, party secretary Kozlov and Deputy Premier Kosygin seem to have the primary “caretaker” responsibilities for party and government affairs, respectively. Kozlov, however, does not receive the preferential treatment that might be expected for someone who has been designated first lieutenant and eventual successor.

It is still unclear how some of the responsibilities at the top are being divided since the personnel shifts at the party congress in October. This is particularly true in the ideological and propaganda fields, with Suslov, Kuusinen, Ilichev, and Ponomarev now all members of the party secretariat. Friction and jockeying in this area seem likely.



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Secret. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises p. 20 of the Weekly Review section of the issue.





184. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource


Washington, April 25, 1962.

SUBJECT

United States Travel Restrictions



We have been reviewing our restrictions on the travel of Soviet citizens in this country in the hope of finding a new approach which would strengthen our political and propaganda posture without damage to our essential security needs.

Our restrictions were imposed in 1952 as a means of retaliating against long-standing restrictions on the travel of American citizens in the USSR. Originally they involved prior notification of intent to travel and were applied only to Soviet officials. They were extended in 1955 to all Soviet citizens other than those who are members of the United Nations Secretariat and closed zones, modeled on those in existence in the USSR, were also established. This followed adoption by the National Security Council of NSC 5427 which provided that “restrictions should be placed upon diplomatic and official representatives of Soviet bloc countries in the United States on the basis of strict reciprocity for restrictions placed upon United States representatives in each Soviet bloc country.”1

In 1957 the United States proposed to the Soviet Government that closed zones be abolished on a basis of reciprocity. Subsequently, we have repeated that proposal several times and have also suggested partial elimination, again on a reciprocal basis. The Soviet Government has never replied officially to these proposals.

Our review has indicated that our previous efforts to use our travel restrictions as a bargaining lever with which to exert pressure for a lessening of Soviet restrictions have become increasingly ineffectual in terms of the exchange program. The travel restrictions were adopted several years before the first exchange agreement was signed in 1958. Despite our best efforts, our rationale for the restrictions has been either largely misunderstood or not appreciated by that segment of the American public concerned with exchanges. Furthermore, we have not been able to extract a significant number of exceptions from the Soviets to their own closed area regulations. Actually, during the course of the past year or so, the Soviets have become increasingly adamant regarding exceptions. We have tried ourselves to adopt a stricter attitude, but we find ourselves on a number of occasions making exceptions in order to achieve our over-all goals of maximum usefulness for each exchange. In so doing, however, we vitiate the basis of our closed area policy which is retaliation for Soviet restrictions in the hope that the Soviet authorities might be induced at least to grant reciprocal exceptions or possibly to liberalize or even eventually abolish their restrictions.

We have come to the conclusion that the travel restrictions no longer serve our interests so far as Soviet visitors are concerned. We are, therefore, recommending the abolition of the travel restrictions for exchange visitors and tourists. We would retain adequate controls on Soviet travel in this country by continuing present arrangements among the Departments concerned. In this way itineraries of Soviet exchange visitors and tourists would be coordinated and approved in advance as before. In the case of long-term Soviet visitors, we would keep the advance notification requirement to enable the Departments of State and Justice to remain aware of the movements of such individuals. We have consulted with the Departments of Defense and Justice and with the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency.2 They have concurred in our recommendation on the basis of the Departmentʼs assessment that the over-all effect would be to our net advantage and that the control arrangements mentioned above be continued. We propose to retain the closed area system for resident Soviet officials for internal security reasons and in order to maintain our bargaining position for our own officials in theUSSR. We also feel that the closed area system should continue to apply to Soviet correspondents accredited in the United States. In view of the stringent restrictions and often provocative treatment to which our correspondents in the Soviet Union are subject, we do not feel we can justify waiving restrictions on Soviet correspondents at this time. Our feeling is re-enforced by the highly distorted reporting engaged in by Soviet correspondents in this country. If we are able to obtain greater opportunities for dissemination of American views in the USSR and if the lot of our correspondents improves, we might wish to reconsider this point.

We consider that removal of the travel restrictions on Soviet visitors would have significant and positive advantages for us, primarily with that segment of the American public concerned with exchanges. Such a move would in all probability result in still greater support of the exchanges program by American scientists and by American universities. At the same time, we could without difficulty assure the public that adequate security controls are being retained. With regard to the Soviet Government, we would present this change as a modest step in improving relations and as in keeping with the hopes expressed at the time of the signing of the recently concluded exchanges agreement regarding broadening of channels of communication between peoples in both countries. We would invite the Soviet Government to respond to our initiative, although the likelihood of a positive response is not great. Our approach would be sufficiently restrained so that it would not be regarded by the Soviets as another evidence of what they consider to be espionage mania or another propaganda gimmick against them.

If you concur in our recommendation to abolish the travel restrictions for Soviet exchange visitors and tourists, the Department will plan to send a note to the Soviet Embassy within the next month or two. The exact timing would depend on the then current international situation. Given the present status of our discussions with the Soviets on a number of international issues, we do not believe in the immediate abolition of these restrictions. Since our primary motivation in doing away with the restrictions is a domestic one, we would not favor, however, indefinitely postponing these changes. In any event, I would plan to advise you before a note is sent.3

Dean Rusk



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text.

1 Regarding NSC 5427, July 15, 1954, see Foreign Relations, 1952-1954, vol. VIII, pp. 1238-1246.

2 Regarding the letters to the Department of Defense and Justice and the CIA, June 9, 1961, see footnote 6, Document 75. In replies dated June 16 and 28, 1961, the CIA and Department of Defense raised some concerns about lifting the restrictions, but stated that it was basically a matter for the Department of State to determine. (Department of State, Central Files, 601.6111/6-1661 and 6-2861) Apparently no reply was received from the Department of Justice, because on February 15, 1962. Rusk again wrote to the Attorney General about lifting the travel restrictions and specifically referred to his June 9 letter. (Ibid., 601.6111/2-2062) In reply to this letter, on March 27 Attorney General Kennedy agreed to lift the restrictions if Rusk determined that it would be to the net advantage of the United States. (Ibid., 511.613/3-2762)

3 On May 2 Bundy informed Rusk that the President had approved the lifting of travel restrictions on Soviet visitors and tourists. (Rusk memorandum, May 15; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR) On May 15 Rusk sent the President a draft text of a note informing the Soviet Ambassador of the changes. (Ibid.) On June 29 the White House approved the note, which was subsequently delivered on July 6. (Kohler memorandum to Rusk, June 29; Department of State, Central Files, 601.6111/6-2961) For text of the note, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 740-741. A memorandum of Ruskʼs conversation with Dobrynin when he presented the note is in Department of State, Central Files, 511.613/7-662.





185. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, April 28, 1962, 11 a.m.-12:15 p.m.

PRIME MINISTER MACMILLANʼS VISIT TO WASHINGTON, APRIL 27-29

SUBJECT

Possibility of a Summit Meeting



PARTICIPANTS

US The President

The Secretary

Under Secretary Ball

Ambassador Bruce

Mr. McGeorge Bundy, White House

Mr. Pierre Salinger, White House

Mr. William R. Tyler, Acting Assistant Secretary of State

Mr. William C. Burdett, Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of State

Mr. Joseph Sweeney, BNA





British Prime Minister Macmillan

Sir Norman Brook, Secretary to the Cabinet

Ambassador Ormsby Gore

Sir Evelyn Shuckburgh, Deputy Under Secretary of State, Foreign Office

Mr. Harold Evans, Public Relations Adviser

Mr. M.A.M. Robb, Information Minister, British Embassy

Mr. John Thompson, First Secretary, British Embassy

Mr. Philip de Zulueta, Private Secretary to Prime Minister





The President said the Prime Minister and he had discussed the possibility of a summit. The Prime Minister commented that a summit hangs on what had just been said about nuclear testing and disarmament. He was doubtful of the value of having a summit if nothing happens. It would be a propaganda exercise. All the pressures would be on us because of our public. We had been thinking about a summit on Berlin, but this raised the problem too high. However, we should not lose contact with this “strange character”.

The President explained that both the Prime Minister and he were in agreement that there is really no sense in a summit unless there could be agreement in some important area, perhaps Berlin or nuclear testing. We would be at a disadvantage. There were three of us and only one of them. There was some advantage in a bilateral meeting in the summer or fall. We should keep this possibility open. A summit would be warranted either in case of a crisis or if an agreement was in prospect. A bilateral meeting was an alternative. The Prime Minister and he were in agreement that it was not right to have a bilateral meeting now.

The Prime Minister suggested that nuclear testing might be the subject of a summit meeting since agreement would never be worked out at the Geneva conferences, complicated by the presence of neutrals. He had the feeling that the only way to do a deal is directly with Khrushchev. The Secretary recalled that in his recent speech on Berlin,1 Gromyko had indicated the Russians might be leading to a meeting of heads of government. We ourselves had played this theme a bit. The Prime Minister said that we must think of the communiqué that would come out at the end of a summit meeting.

At one point during the meeting the Prime Minister said Khrushchev seemed to be in a curious mood. He was talking now at length to anyone who went to see him. If he took a position as he did on Laos at Vienna, it would influence the whole Russian bureaucracy. The whole thing changes at a word from Khrushchev. The thing is to get to him. If we made up our minds to make another effort on nuclear testing we should consider seeing him. It is no good trying to persuade junior people. If the word comes from Khrushchev they will have to work the problem out. When he gives an order he carries the entire structure with him. The Prime Minister agreed on the dangers of a meeting of three or four of us. An opportunity could be created to see Khrushchev at Geneva or the U.N.

Reverting at another point to the question of a summit, the President said that he did not know of any labor agreement that had come about except as the result of an offer at the last minute to the top level. An agreement could result from a summit or maybe it could be reached at a bilateral meeting. The Prime Minister suggested that such a meeting would provide an opportunity for talks also about other matters in addition to the ostensible subject of the meeting. The President again mentioned the awkwardness of a meeting with three on our side and one on theirs. Perhaps it would be better for the Prime Minister, De Gaulle or himself to see Khrushchev bilaterally.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2084. Secret. Drafted by Burdett and approved by the White House on May 4.

1 The text of Gromykoʼs speech to the Supreme Soviet on April 24 is printed in Pravda, April 25, 1962.





186. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Press Secretary (Salinger) to President KennedySource


Washington, May 1, 1962.

This writer had lunch on Tuesday, May 1, 1962 with the USSR Ambassador Dobrynin at the Soviet Embassy. Also present were Enver Mamedov of the Novosty News Agency and Georgi Bolshakov, Editor of USSR Magazine. The early part of the luncheon was taken up with non-political pleasantries and in the hope that my trip to the USSR might better USSR-USA relations.

After the departure of Mamedov, the Ambassador became serious and launched into a discussion of his own relationship with the Soviet Government. He said that it was very important to him to report accurately to Moscow the views of this Administration on a variety of subjects. Sometimes, he said, he had to rely on the newspapers for these views; that this source was not always accurate.

He said he would like to improve on this feature of his ambassadorship; he would like to have informal contacts with the President if the President so desired. He said the relationship would be very informal and he would be prepared to meet at any time and at any place with the President to discuss any subject.

He was also interested in how Mrs. Dobrynin could make contact with Mrs. Kennedy. Prior to leaving the Soviet Union he had a telephone call from Mikhail Kharlamov who had received a copy of the TV film of the White House tour which Mrs. Dobrynin had been invited to see with Mrs. Kharlamov. They both enjoyed this tour very much and he said that Mrs. Dobrynin was anxious to meet Mrs. Kennedy without causing embarrassment to Mrs. Kennedy.

Dobrynin said he understood the political problems of this country.

The Ambassador said he would like to establish some rapport with other members of the Administration: Bundy, Ted Sorensen, Schlesinger, Kissinger.1 He said if he was in touch with these people on a regular basis there was less of a chance of sending inaccurate reports to Moscow. He has the desire to send completely accurate reports to Moscow even though he cannot guarantee Soviet reaction to them but that he was determined not to send home just what the government wanted to hear but what the actual views were.

He said he was just feeling his way in this country but that anything which could be done to insure his receiving accurate information would be highly appreciated. I told him I was certain our government wanted him to have accurate information particularly since we felt that he had the confidence of the Soviet government. The Ambassador told me that personally during the previous ambassadorial administration here, Georgi Bolshakov was used as a go-between because we did not have the confidence of getting accurate information to Moscow; and in some cases that would continue to be true; but that now he was available to enjoy that same confidence.

Dobrynin asked if I would have a message from the President to take to Khrushchev on my trip to the USSR. I replied that I would not.

Pierre Salinger2



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR, Dobrynin Talks. Secret. Copies were sent to Bundy and Bohlen.

1 Henry Kissinger was a part-time consultant to the National Security Council during 1961.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.





187. National Intelligence EstimateSource


Washington, May 2, 1962.

NIE 11-9-62

TRENDS IN SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY

The Problem

To estimate probable Soviet courses of action in foreign policy over the next year or so and to examine some factors affecting the Soviet outlook on international politics over a longer period.

Conclusions

1. Despite attacks on the general line of Soviet foreign policy by the Chinese and other Communists over the last two years or so, and despite some disappointment with the results of that line on the part of the Soviets themselves, we believe that the general principles and tactical methods of Soviet foreign policy are likely to be continued for some time to come. (Paras. 10-12, 43-46, 62)

2. The Soviet leaders retain basic confidence in their ideologically-motivated belief that the Communist system is destined to prevail worldwide. But the aggressive quality of their policies derived from this belief will continue to be limited by their full appreciation of the dangers of general nuclear war, and their unwillingness to run serious risks of such a conflict. This does not mean, however, that the Soviets would always estimate such risks correctly nor that they would abandon vital interests to avoid them. (Paras. 13-17)

3. Soviet tactics of struggle under the slogan of “peaceful coexistence” rest on two basic assumptions: (a) that the USSRʼs economic system will demonstrate its superiority and increasingly give it a power advantage; and (b) that the “masses,” first in the underdeveloped and former colonial countries but ultimately in advanced Western states also, will increasingly join the Communists in the struggle to overthrow the “system of Western imperialism.” (Paras. 25, 42-46)

4. The greater stress placed by the Soviets in the last year or two on wars of “national liberation” is in part a response to Chinese criticism that the Soviets were magnifying the dangers of war with the West and underplaying the necessary role of violence. Despite these Chinese pressures, the USSR has not given full political and material support or committed its prestige to all armed anti-Western movements in the underdeveloped areas. We believe that the Soviets will continue to follow an opportunistic policy in this regard. (Paras. 21-22)

5. Although the Soviets are unlikely, as a matter of general policy, to use their own forces to achieve local gains, they might do so in some area adjacent to Bloc territory if they judged that the political circumstances were favorable and believed that the West would not make an effective military response. They would probably employ Soviet forces as necessary if some Western military action on the periphery of the Bloc threatened the integrity of the Bloc itself. (Para. 20)

6. We see no prospect for acceptance by the Soviets of a permanently stabilized situation in Germany, which they will continue to regard as a key area of struggle. While a direct challenge to the Western position in Berlin proceeding from a separate “peace treaty” with East Germany cannot be excluded, it seems more likely that the Soviets will continue to pursue their aims by diplomatic pressure and by small unilateral steps designed to whittle away the Western position and to establish the de facto sovereignty of the East German regime. (Paras. 29-37)

7. It is unlikely that a change in Soviet leadership would produce any major shift in the Soviet outlook or lead to policies carrying increased dangers of war. However, Khrushchevʼs present role testifies to the importance of the individual leader in the conduct of Soviet policy, and the man or group which succeeds him may introduce significant changes in style and even in the weight attached to various tactics. (Para. 63)

8. Over the long run, the concept of ineradicable hostility between systems may gradually come to carry less weight in determining Soviet international conduct. The chances of such a long-run change depend to some extent upon the strength of certain evolutionary trends within Soviet society and, to a greater extent, on the impact of divisions within the Communist movement. But most of all they depend on whether fundamental Communist beliefs are sustained by successes in the East-West struggle or, over an extended period of time, are challenged by failure to achieve substantial progress in that struggle. Thus US strength, maintained at an adequate deterrent level, and the effectiveness of US policy, are crucial factors bearing upon this possible evolution in the Soviet outlook. (Paras. 64-69)

9. Even if such a tendency should emerge, however, strong national aspirations would continue to sustain great East-West conflicts of interest. The requirements of Soviet national security, prestige, and ambition, as seen by the Soviet leaders and people, would still bring the USSR into collision with the interests of other states, even if communism lost all of its fanatical character. The most that could be expected would be that some issues would become more tractable and negotiable, particularly those which were not deeply rooted in the national interests of the Soviet state. (Paras. 65, 69)



Discussion

I. The Soviet Outlook

10. The mood of exuberant confidence which marked the conduct of Soviet foreign policy two or three years ago seems in the last year or so to have sobered somewhat. In the aftermath of the Sputnik success of 1957 the Soviets appeared for some time to entertain expectations of early advances at the expense of the West. But the promising factors which spurred the Soviet mood in that period seem to have lost some of their force and new complications have arisen.

11. As the Soviets contrast 1962 to, say, 1958, they must recognize that the significant advantage they then believed they would acquire in missiles and therefore in strategic posture has failed to materialize. The prospects for a settlement of the Berlin and German question in accord with Soviet objectives, which probably seemed good through 1959 and the spring of 1960, were not realized, and the attempt to resume pressure on this subject in mid-1961 brought a sharp rise in the pace of the arms race. This development in turn tightened the chronic squeeze on Soviet resources at a time when some domestic programs, notably in agriculture, in housing, and in some branches of investment, were falling well short of expectations. Added to these concerns, there has been since at least the spring of 1960 an ever sharpening crisis in relations with Communist China. This development has brought confusion and uncertainty to the international Communist movement, which the Soviets see as an important instrument of their challenge to the West.

12. This is not to say that the last year or two has been marked only by disappointments. On the contrary, there have been significant successes also. The Soviets have doubtless viewed the Cuban development as a gain. Also they evidently believe that trends generally in Latin America and in some other parts of the underdeveloped world show great promise in the long term. They probably regard the “national liberation” struggles in Laos and South Vietnam as progressing on the whole favorably. Nevertheless, the more rapid general advance of Communist fortunes which the Soviets seemed to have anticipated two or three years ago has failed to materialize. Their confidence in the outlook at present, while still strong, seems to have assumed a somewhat more dogged quality and to be keyed to an expectation of slower advance. There has been no evidence, however, of any fundamental reappraisal of policy in the light of a somewhat disappointing record of events. Indeed the general principles and tactical methods of Soviet foreign policy which Khrushchev had developed earlier were reaffirmed at the XXII Party Congress of late 1961.

13. The visible growth of Soviet power and of Soviet influence abroad is the primary factor sustaining the Sovietsʼ basic confidence. Thus the Soviets feel that the present relation of forces enables them to challenge the Western Powers at crisis points everywhere although they appreciate that the risks of nuclear warfare impose caution on themselves as well as their opponents. The US, Khrushchev now asserts, must realize that the time has passed when it could have its own way in the world, even in an area like Latin America; it must recognize theUSSRʼs claim to be its great power equal, and therefore entitled to be involved in the settlement of all major international questions.

14. In addition to these considerations, the Soviet outlook on foreign policy is also conditioned by the ideology of Marxism-Leninism. This doctrine leads the Soviet leaders to see the world movement of historical forces as favorable to them, to believe that they can associate all sorts of popular and national aspirations with their cause, to regard the developed societies of the West as transitional and destined to give way. Such an outlook contains by itself few tactical prescriptions; it can be used to justify periods of waiting as well as the vigorous exploitation of opportunities. But it anchors Soviet policy to the premise that international politics is at bottom a clash of systems which precludes any genuine, lasting accommodation with the West.

15. Soviet doctrines, however, are not unchanging. Khrushchev has been resourceful in introducing reformulations which reflect a growing awareness of the dangers and complexities confronting the USSR as it extends its operations in the world arena. He has placed great stress, often at the cost of ideological confusion and conflict, on the preventability of war, on the decisiveness of economic competition, on the legitimacy of cooperation with non-Communist and even anti- Communist governments. These theses are intended to permit the USSR to pursue its external objectives with greater flexibility and sophistication. At the same time, they are designed to justify policies which permit careful control of military risks and accord high priority to the goal of domestic economic growth.

16. The US occupies a special place in the Soviet outlook. The primary element in the Soviet attitude is, of course, the concept of Washington as the stronghold of the enemy camp. In addition, however, the Soviets have great respect and even admiration for US material achievements. As rulers of a nation which has newly reached the status of a superpower, they greatly value any American acknowledgements of equality and, conversely, are highly sensitive to any American derogation of or challenge to their prestige. This factor also contributes to the recurrent Soviet impulse toward bilateralism. Moscow sometimes appears to be intrigued with the notion that the two greatest powers could somehow combine to contain or override the interests of lesser powers. But this idea, which appears out of harmony with the premise of basic conflict of systems, has not been accompanied by a readiness to compromise on the major issues in dispute between the US and the USSR. We believe that, in the future as well, this idea is more likely to affect the manner in which the USSR approaches these issues, and that only occasionally, than to alter the substance of its positions.



Attitudes Toward War

17. Fundamental hostility toward the non-Communist world defines one limit of Soviet foreign policy; so long as it persists, the USSR will regard international issues as opportunities progressively to weaken and undermine its opponents, and not as occasions for conciliation which would guard the interests of all parties. The other limit, which puts a check upon this aggressiveness, is the Soviet leadersʼ awareness that their own nation and system would face destruction in a general nuclear war. Both their statements and their actions in recent years have demonstrated their unwillingness to run any considerable risks of this eventuality. This does not mean, however, that they would always estimate the risks correctly, nor does it mean that they would abandon interests they considered vital in order to avoid grave risk of nuclear war.

18. The Soviet leaders evidently continue to base their military and foreign policy planning on the assumption that the present overall military relationship, in which each side can exert a strong deterrent upon the other, will continue for some time to come. They are clearly determined to maintain and improve their strong military posture. In addition, they are vigorously pursuing programs of research and development in advanced weapons to acquire whatever military advantage they can, and they would, of course, make heavy political use of any successes they achieve. It is possible that some future technological breakthrough would persuade them that they had acquired a decisive advantage and could therefore press the West with far more aggressive policies. We do not believe, however, that the Soviets base their policies upon the expectation that they will be able to achieve, within the foreseeable future, a military posture which would make the deliberate initiation of general war a rational decision; the Soviets realize that the US is determined to maintain second-strike capabilities which would visit intolerable destruction upon them. In any case their policies rest on the conviction that Communist victory can be won without resort to nuclear war.

19. The overt Soviet position on limited wars is that these will grow, rapidly and inevitably, into general nuclear war and are therefore also to be avoided. In our view this formulation is primarily designed to deter the West from the local use of force and does not mean that the Soviets would themselves immediately expand any local conflict into general war; rather, if at all possible they would employ political means to prevent such escalation. In circumstances where they enjoyed a local preponderance of power but important Western interests were at stake, they would probably use that power with restraint in order not to confront their opponent with the painful choice of enlarging the conflict or accepting a conspicuous defeat.

20. We believe that the Soviets are unlikely, as a matter of general policy, to assume the military and political risks involved in using their own forces to achieve local gains. Nevertheless, they might do so in some area adjacent to Bloc territory if they judged that the West, either because it was deterred by Soviet nuclear power or for some other reason, would not make an effective military response. They would probably employ Soviet forces as necessary if some Western military action on the periphery of the Bloc threatened the integrity of the Bloc itself. Even in the latter case, however, they would attempt to use their forces in a way calculated to bring hostilities to a conclusion short of general war. At a much lower level, they will almost certainly encourage and support the use of force by pro-Communist forces when they believe that a local situation is ripe for forceful exploitation and that the challenge to Western interests is not great enough, and their own involvement not direct enough, to involve risks of a direct encounter between US and Soviet forces.

21. This estimate of Soviet views on general and local war is generally consistent with the positions laid out by Khrushchev on 6 January 1961, when he defined various types of wars and the USSRʼs attitude toward them. On that occasion, in addition to stating Soviet opposition to both world wars and local wars between states, Khrushchev distinguished a category of “wars of national liberation, or popular uprisings.” Such internal wars, ranging pro-Soviet or anti-Western forces against colonial or pro-Western regimes, he declared to be “just” and deserving of Communist support. He was carefully vague, however, in discussing the forms which this support would take, and in particular he neither promised nor hinted that Soviet forces would join in the fighting. It has become clear in the past year that this was not a statement of intent to usher in a new phase of vigorous Soviet incitement of such conflicts everywhere, or of maximum military assistance to “national liberation” forces.

22. Instead, it seems likely that Khrushchevʼs emphasis on “national liberation” warfare, not a new idea at all, was intended in part to meet Chinese criticisms then being made that the USSR, by its undifferentiated stress upon the need to avoid war, was in fact ruling out altogether the use of force in advancing the Communist cause. This charge is a major component in the Chinese attack upon the correctness of Soviet policies and, therefore, upon the legitimacy of the USSRʼs traditional leadership of the Communist movement. It is also designed to win for China the allegiance of Communists and radicals in the less developed countries, who are less firmly tied to Soviet leadership than their European counterparts. Despite these Chinese pressures, the USSR has not given full political and material support or committed its prestige to all armed anti-Western movements in the underdeveloped areas. We believe that the Soviets will continue to follow an opportunistic policy in this regard.



The Strategy of “Peaceful Coexistence”

23. In the Soviet leadersʼ assessment of the forces at work in the modern world, there are a host of issues, trends, and sentiments which can be turned to their account. The strategy of “peaceful coexistence,” which is the fruit of this assessment, is intended to focus the attention and energies of Communists everywhere upon the incessant exploitation of these forces. This strategy puts great stress on the virtues of flexibility and expediency, and allows for a wide variety of contradictory tactics, frequently pursued simultaneously. Thus military intimidation goes hand in hand with championing of the peace theme, bourgeois governments are courted while their local Communist opponents receive Soviet support, and the Western Powers are treated to promises of détente while their colonies and ex-colonies are urged to turn against the “imperialists” and while Moscow maintains its demands for concessions on Berlin.

24. One noteworthy tactic of this strategy is the raising periodically of demands for Summit meetings. Because his success in Soviet politics has depended partly on his personal qualities, Khrushchev is probably prone to overestimate the effect on foreign statesmen of the pressure he brings to bear in personal encounter. He also believes that, at such a meeting, his Western counterparts will be under greater pressure than he to avoid a “failure” and will therefore be obliged to make concessions to Soviet positions. Khrushchev clearly has a personal penchant for meetings with the President, which we believe reflects his desire that the USSR shall be acknowledged as Americaʼs great power equal and that he himself shall personify this equality. Finally, he probably also conceives of Summit meetings as a way of further entrenching his own leadership in the USSR and the validity of his own prescriptions for dealing with the West.

25. Central to the “peaceful coexistence” strategy is the belief that time is on the side of the USSR and that, without general war, the Western position can be gradually but steadily eroded. This belief in turn rests in great part upon the Soviet conviction that economic competition is the decisive factor in the struggle of the two systems. This is the meaning of the slogan emphasized so prominently at the XXII Congress, that the Soviet Party “considers Communist construction in the Soviet Union as the fulfillment of its international duty to the working people of all countries.” The Soviet leaders expect that tangible economic successes in physical power and popular well-being will prove so impressive and attractive, and so disheartening to their opponents, that their own position and prospects in the international arena will be steadily enhanced.



The Chinese Critique of Soviet Policy

26. But this slogan, however closely it is linked in the Soviet outlook with the prospects of the Communist movement, clearly implies that the claims of that movement will be subordinated to the security concerns and national interests of the USSR. And so it is precisely at this point, where the theses on war and economic competition combine to produce the strategy of “peaceful coexistence,” that the Chinese Communists have raised a fundamental dissent. They perceive in this Soviet analysis a justification for denying priority to courses of action which meet Chinese interests but fail to serve directly the objectives of theUSSR. The Chinese leaders see confirmation of their suspicions in a host of indicators: Soviet reluctance to provide them with advanced weapon capabilities, Khrushchevʼs recurrent moves toward détente and direct dealings with the Western leaders, Moscowʼs stress on the disarmament issue, and its unwillingness to give support to all-out tactics of militancy in all areas of contention with the West. Perhaps most important, the Chinese object to the Soviet leadersʼ insistence upon building communism in the USSR first and their concomitant refusal to delay domestic progress in order to bring all members of the Bloc up to the level of their own country.

27. There is some truth, we believe, in Chinese contentions, but it is an old truth. Ever since its founding the USSR has regularly subordinated the claims of foreign Communist parties to national objectives whenever a conflict arose between them. The essential difference now is that, with the growth of the international movement and especially with the accession of some parties to state power, these claims have become more diverse and urgent. In particular, China has sufficient power and independence to defy Soviet discipline and to argue its case with great force.

28. We have analyzed in a recent estimate the way in which the Soviets sought at the XXII Congress, by the attacks on Stalin, Albania, and the “antiparty group,” to discredit Peipingʼs policy views.1 Then and subsequently, the USSR has reasserted its foreign policies in the face of opposition within the movement and has served notice that adherence to “peaceful coexistence” is a matter of Communist discipline. The Chinese have nevertheless continued publicly to oppose and criticize Soviet policies, making use of doctrinal arguments which find considerable response among Communists who cling to the orthodoxy of an earlier day. We believe that there is no longer much chance of a fundamental resolution of Sino-Soviet differences, and that in the continuing competition between the two theUSSR, despite its vigorous rebuttal of Chinese criticisms, will find itself unable to ignore them entirely in framing its tactics. This factor will not, in our view, cause the Soviets to run significantly greater risks in East-West confrontations than they are now willing to contemplate. But, depending upon the course of this competition, it will exert greater or lesser pressures on the USSR to display militancy against the West and to achieve tangible successes which demonstrate the correctness of Moscowʼs policies.



II. Soviet Policies in the Near Future

Berlin and Germany

29. The issues arising from the division of Germany remain, as they have for the entire postwar period, the most critical in the whole confrontation between East and West. The Soviets wish to bolster beyond challenge the internal stability of the East German Satellite regime, always the potential weak link in the East European system, where a breakdown of Communist power could place in hazard all the regimes under Soviet hegemony in that area. The concurrent Soviet offensive aim is to limit the West German contribution to the strength of NATO and ultimately to separate the Federal Republic from its Western partners. Both of these objectives have inspired the three year old Soviet effort to erode the Western position in Berlin and ultimately to effect a withdrawal of the allies from the city. Khrushchev believes that, if he is successful, this would be a long step toward establishing the permanence and stability of the GDR and would at the same time deliver a body blow to West Germanyʼs confidence in its allies and, indeed, to the confidence and cohesion of the entire NATO Alliance.

30. More than three years of postponement, however, clearly signifies theUSSRʼs awareness of the dangers inherent in unilateral actions encroaching upon Western rights in Berlin. The chief result of the stiff Soviet demands put forth again in June 1961 was to provoke from the US a display of firmness and a military buildup; as a consequence, the USSR felt obliged to undertake increased military expenditures and demonstrations which in turn curbed Khrushchevʼs efforts to readjust economic priorities in favor of the consumer. In this situation, he was quick to use the subsequent US initiative for bilateral talks as a pretext for withdrawing his 31 December deadline for a separate treaty.

31. In the light of this record, we think it unlikely that the Soviets are resolved to bring the Berlin issue to a head in some fixed period of time. The USSR, by closing the sector border, has overcome the refugee problem in a way which avoided a direct infringement on essential Allied rights. Nevertheless, the building of the wall has reduced only one of the urgencies in their Berlin problem, and their basic objectives remain unsecured. In addition, Soviet prestige, and that of Khrushchev personally has been deeply committed to demonstrable progress in this question. The Soviets must fear that continued failure to advance will not only hearten their Western opponents, but will also lend greater weight among Communists to Chinese criticisms that the “peaceful coexist-ence” strategy is a failure and in reality disguises the USSRʼs abandonment of militant struggle against the West.

32. Thus we believe that the USSR will continue its efforts to obtain at least minimal concessions through negotiation. Its tactics in current diplomatic conversations and periodic harassment on the access routes to West Berlin are intended to serve this end. At the same time, however, other Soviet maneuvers suggest an effort to broaden the scope of East-West discussions in a fashion which would obscure a fundamental stalemate over the Berlin question. These maneuvers are probably intended to preserve Soviet flexibility while diplomatic probing of the Allied position on Berlin continues. In addition, they permit the USSR to explore the possibilities of making gains in related political areas, such as European security arrangements or greater recognition for East Germany, which could for a time compensate for the lack of progress toward their objectives in Berlin.

33. We believe that, despite their hitherto essentially unyielding stand on the terms of a Berlin solution, there will be some flexibility in actual Soviet negotiating tactics. Among the various provisions associated with the “free city” proposal, probably the demand for a change in the status of West Berlin has the greatest immediate importance to the USSR. The Soviets probably do not expect to obtain Western agreement to this demand, however, and they are likely at some point to accept some “compromise” formula. It might provide for the allies to remain in West Berlin and to enjoy access to the city in exchange for undertakings which the Soviets could represent as a change in the cityʼs status and some de facto recognition of the GDR. This would have the additional advantage of allowing them subsequently, with minimum risk, to fulfill their commitment to sign a separate peace treaty, particularly if the new arrangements left open to the allies the face-saving device of treating East German controllers as Soviet agents. The Soviets might even accept, as part of a Berlin arrangement, some form of international supervision over access, but they would seek to inject the GDR as fully as possible into these procedures.

34. We have regularly estimated that, if the USSR reached the conclusion that the allies were unwilling to grant any significant concessions in negotiations, it would proceed along the road of a separate peace treaty. Repeated Soviet procrastination on various pretexts, however, has demonstrated the USSRʼs extreme reluctance to take this step. While we believe that the USSR would not accompany the signing of a treaty with an immediate and absolute challenge to Allied access, the Soviets would not wish such a treaty to be entirely meaningless, yet its risks would increase in proportion to the meaningfulness of its implementation. Accordingly, there is a good chance that they will continue for some months to exercise their pressures through a variety of local harassments, hoping in this way to demoralize both the allies and the West Berliners and thus to create more favorable conditions for later negotiations. But we cannot exclude the possibility that a combination of circumstances might lead the USSR, sometime during the next year or so, to embark on a course of major unilateral steps of the kind threatened under a separate peace treaty.

35. Whatever their tactics in the period immediately ahead, we think it highly unlikely that during the next few years the Soviets will come to regard Berlin as an issue to be settled by a genuine and lasting compromise which stops short of incorporating the western half of the city into East Germany. Their objectives in this area are deeply rooted in their view of Soviet security requirements: nor will they soon abandon the idea that the changed relation of forces between East and West has rendered West Berlin an anachronism which they need not tolerate forever.

36. The USSR intends, by demonstrating the firmness of its hold upon East Germany and its ability to threaten West Berlin, to stimulate doubts in the Federal Republic about the validity of Bonnʼs whole foreign policy orientation. As a supplement to this approach, the Soviet Government has recently stepped up its efforts to urge upon German opinion the advantages of a more neutral posture. The Soviets are encouraged in this effort by the recent political gains of the Free Democrats and the prospects of Adenauerʼs departure. They are likely to develop this tactic further in the coming year.

37. The more active policy the Soviets have lately pursued toward West Germany probably reflects also their concern about the advance of the Common Market and the European unity movement. They have already made it clear that they regard affiliation of the European neutrals with the Common Market as a threat to their interests. Their understanding of the European unity movement has probably never been very clear, perhaps because the phenomenon of “capitalist” states submerging national interests in supranational institutions is in flat contradiction to Marxist-Leninist teachings. But their misgivings about this development, which they have few means to combat, are evidently real. Most of all they would be prone to suspect that the Germans will come to dominate “Europe” and find in it the means of power to pursue “revanchist” aims. In addition, they are bound to fear the disruptive effects on their inherently unstable and relatively impoverished Satellite empire of a Europe growing in unity, strength, and prosperity.



Disarmament

38. Soviet behavior in the disarmament field in the last year or so has reinforced our earlier judgments that the USSRʼs primary objectives in this area are to identify itself with universal desires for peace and an end to the arms race and to inhibit and discredit Western policy. Thus agitation for disarmament is conceived by the Soviets as political action intended to bring about alignments favorable to their interests, and also to make it difficult for their opponents to employ force against Communist advances. We believe that the Soviets do have an interest in reducing their present and particularly their prospective military burden. The economic argument for disarmament, which in the past clearly has not been compelling, may acquire increasing weight if the armaments race is not contained. As for the dangers of war, the Soviets still prefer to rely on their own armed strength, and on the control which they intend to retain over the development of crisis situations, rather than to meet Western requirements for inspection and to forfeit the political advantages of their great military power.

39. We believe that, at least during the near future, Soviet activity in this field will continue to aim at political exploitation and the imposition of restraints upon their opponents rather than at agreements on terms which the West would find acceptable. Along with their advocacy of general and complete disarmament, they will maintain an interest in some partial measures, especially those which have a specific political import. A nuclear free zone, for example, tends not only to impede Western nuclear deployment and sharing, but applied to Germany has the effect of imposing a special denial on the Federal Republic and weakening its military and political ties with its Western partners. The Soviets will also advocate schemes in the European security field which would promote the de facto recognition of the GDR and require a reduction in the American military presence in Europe. They will also try to make use of the disarmament negotiating process for other ends: cultivating support among participating nonaligned states, establishing the principle of tripartitism, and achieving direct contact with Western leaders.

40. Having completed an extensive nuclear test series last fall, the Soviets are now seeking to maximize the political costs of further Western testing, coupling propaganda with repeated offers to sign a test ban treaty based on national detection systems. Now that the US has resumed atmospheric testing, we think it certain that Soviet tests will follow. At the same time, however, the USSR will continue to agitate the test ban issue if only because of the general political appeal of this question. But we do not foresee any considerable movement toward Western terms in the Sovietsʼ position over the next year or so. They probably consider that they have a high priority requirement for further testing and in any case they will almost certainly continue to resist the inspection features of Western test ban proposals.



[Here follow paragraphs 41-61 on future Soviet policies on the United Nations, underdeveloped areas, Africa, the Middle East, Latin America, and Asia and the Far East.]

III. Sources of Possible Long-term Change in the Soviet Outlook

62. In the opening section of this estimate, we have set forth certain broad considerations underlying Soviet foreign policy which are likely to remain generally valid for some time to come. We recognize, however, that the environment in which Soviet policy is made is changing. It may therefore be useful to examine three major factors—the course of developments within the USSR, changing relations inside the Bloc and the Communist movement, and the movement of events in the East-West competition—and to consider how they might in the long run affect the Soviet outlook on international politics.

Internal Developments

63. Within the USSR, Khrushchevʼs removal from the scene might be followed by a prolonged power struggle which could produce confusion and uncertainty in foreign policy or considerable fluctuations in tactics. Apart from this possibility, Khrushchevʼs present role testifies to the importance of the individual leader in the conduct of Soviet policy, and the man or group which succeeds him may introduce significant changes in style and even in the weight attached to various tactics. We think it certain, however, that such a leadership would appreciate, as fully as does the present one, the consequences of nuclear war. Further, this leadership would be unlikely to take a substantially different view either of the interests of the USSR or of the risks justified by these interests. We do not believe, therefore, that a change of Soviet leadership would in itself produce any major shift in the Soviet outlook or lead to policies carrying increased dangers of war.

64. Present trends suggest that, over the long run, popular aspirations are likely to acquire a larger influence in Soviet domestic politics.2 We believe that such a development would have some effect on the conduct of foreign policy, but this process would almost certainly be gradual and subject to setbacks. Even now the Soviet people are not enthusiastically committed to all aspects of Communist ideology. In particular, they are not obsessed with the idea of ineradicable and total conflict, on ideological grounds, between themselves and the non-Communist world. Their desire for peace and for more rapid gains in material welfare is pronounced. To the extent that these attitudes become more important in formulating Soviet foreign policy, the USSRʼs reluctance to enter upon risky confrontations with the West—especially for the sake of advancing the Communist cause in remote areas—would be reinforced.

65. At the same time, the Russian people possess strong nationalist feeling. They welcome and support a vigorous assertion of Soviet power on the world scene in furtherance of Soviet national interest. Accordingly, we believe that, even if Soviet politics come to represent popular opinion to a greater degree than at present there would not necessarily be any substantial lessening of international conflict. But the nature of such conflict, and the atmosphere in which it took place, would change, becoming less ideological and more traditional. While East-West disputes would persist, there would be a better chance of the occasional recognition of areas of common interest between the contending powers.

Relations in the Communist World

66. Soviet control over the international Communist movement is likely to be further diminished in the face of pressures for national autonomy. This process, insofar as it enables individual parties to give a more national cast to their policies, may increase the effectiveness of Communist political appeals in some areas. This result, however, is likely to be more than offset by the spectacle of policy conflicts and doctrinal argument within the movement. These consequences will tend to rob Soviet policy of the special authority which it has derived from the concept of a wholly united movement based on a single agreed interpretation of human society. In addition, some of the Soviet energies now directed against the West may be diverted to combating Chinese policies in various areas.

67. Behind these difficulties for the execution of Soviet policy, however, lies the possibility of an important change in the Soviet outlook itself. If the Chinese challenge produces a definitive and open Sino-Soviet break, and if China subsequently progresses toward great power status and develops an effective rivalry to the USSR as a claimant to leadership of the Communist movement, the Soviet view of world politics as essentially a bipolar struggle would be increasingly difficult to sustain. In these circumstances, the Soviet leaders might come to feel that in some matters their interests paralleled those of the West rather than those of their enormous and uncontrollable neighbor.

The Course of East-West Competition

68. Perhaps the most significant factor which will affect the Soviet outlook, however, is the success or failure which the USSRʼs foreign policy encounters in the years to come. Successes in expanding Soviet influence, major weakenings in Western positions, and in particular any further advances of direct Communist rule will act to confirm the Soviet leaders in their analysis of a fundamental conflict of systems destined to end in their triumph. However, they have already experienced difficulty in translating real gains in military power into concrete political successes under conditions of nuclear stalemate. And in the underdeveloped areas, it has proven far more difficult to move the newer nations into a full association with Soviet policies and thence along the path toward Communist control than the Soviets thought it would be when, in an earlier phase, these countries were emerging from Western rule. If Soviet objectives should be continually frustrated, the Soviet leaders would have to reappraise the validity of some of their key doctrines. They might in this case gradually relax their effort to extend communism everywhere.3 Alternatively, they might become far more aggressive in order to make good on the traditional commitment to make communism a world system; but, assuming that the West retained its deterrent power, this seems less likely because of the greater risks such a course would involve. Thus US strength, maintained at an adequate deterrent level, and the effectiveness of US policy are crucial factors bearing upon this possible evolution in the Soviet outlook.

69. In sum, none of the factors discussed above portends any early or sharp change in the basic Soviet outlook upon the external world. Still less do they suggest that any deliberate renunciation of Marxism-Leninism, or of the international movement built upon it, is likely. They do point, however, to the possibility that in time—almost certainly a long time—the special intensity which ideological hostility imparts to world politics may diminish. Such a development would not mean that international conflicts of interest ceased to exist, or even that the danger of general war was appreciably reduced. On the contrary, the requirements of Soviet national security, prestige, and ambition, as seen by the Soviet leaders and people, would still bring the USSR into collision with the interests of other states, even if communism lost all of its fanatical character. The most that could be expected would be that some issues would become more tractable and negotiable, particularly those which were not deeply rooted in the national interests of the Soviet state, and that the occasional recognition of a measure of common interest between the USSR and its adversaries would not be invariably stifled by ideological hostility.



* * *



* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Intelligence Estimates. Secret. Submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by the U.S. Intelligence Board on May 2.

1 11-5-62, “Political Developments in the USSR and the Communist World,” dated 21 February 1962. [Footnote in the source text. Document 160.]

2 NIE 11-5-62, “Political Developments in the USSR and the Communist World,” (paragraphs 33-37), dated 21 February 1962 for a more complete discussion of this matter. [Footnote in the source text.]

3 The FBI representative to the USIB does not concur with paragraph 68, feeling that: if Soviet objectives should be continually frustrated, the Soviet leaders would have to reappraise their tactics in applying some of their key doctrines. They might, in this case, find it necessary to delay their efforts to extend communism everywhere. [Footnote in the source text.]





188. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, May 4, 1962, 6 p.m.

2848. Athens for Secretary. Indecision in Soviet policy, both domestic and foreign, which has been manifest for some months appears be continuing.

On internal scene delay in appointing union committee to supervise agriculture and recent appointment as its head of Ignatov, who was dropped from Presidium by 22nd Party Congress, suggests continuing differences of opinion in leadership on agricultural matters. Similarly, absence of any clear information on increased agricultural investments may be result of uncertainty on amount and source of resources to be diverted to agriculture, though it is of course possible this due to desire conceal from those affected as well as foreign observers areas from which resources will be taken. Cancellation 1967 World Fair gives good indication of extent strain on resources.

Few changes in govt and party at Supreme Soviet possibly also due reluctance force issues. We have no information on significance Kirilenkoʼs appointment.1 While seems clear Spiridonov has been downgraded,2 we have no basis for assessing significance this action. Apart from a few promotions, no changes made in top military echelons where, as embassy has pointed out, many top officers old for their jobs.

In foreign field Soviets appear content let matters drag in Laos, Congo and Viet Nam. They also clearly prepared continue talking about Berlin and desire avoid impasse at this time although yesterdayʼs Pravda “Observer” article suggests there is time limit on this policy. They have moreover shown desire lower temperature in Berlin and reduce danger of escalation in this dispute. Apart from his pronouncement on summitry K did not take advantage of Cowles interview3 to develop any new lines which unlike him. Similarly he cancelled proposed TV exchange with President.

Difficult assess significance this policy of drift. So far as Berlin concerned I believe K has been influenced by our military preparations, by fact he must know that so far as U.S. concerned we consider missile gap in our favor, and by situation in East Germany. In view Soviet internal demands it cannot have been easy for Soviets to provide credit of over 300 million dollars to East Germans and I should think Soviets would be at pains avoid allowing Berlin situation develop in such manner as to bring end to interzonal trade which would enormously increase economic burden on them quite apart from danger of uprising in East Germany as well as risk of war. (On other hand K so deeply committed to solution Berlin problem, difficult see how he can allow it to drag on until factors mentioned above have changed.) While I believe K remains firmly in control there is little doubt that there is disagreement in leadership on major policies. Among others may be mentioned following on which both logic and some evidence point to differences of opinion: 1. Extent of de-Stalinization;

2. Agricultural policy; heavy vs light industry and general problem allocation resources;

3. Basic military policy and disarmament;

4. Bloc relations;

5. Foreign policy both as to content and conduct including attitude toward relations with us and personal diplomacy;

6. Policy toward under-developed countries including role Communist parties and amount and direction Soviet aid;

7. Internal party matters such as personnel, role of party, aims, extent of democratization, control of population, handling of youth.





Given setbacks of past 6 months or so and opposition to various of his policies on foregoing problems, natural K would wish avoid initiatives at this time which might add to those who for one reason or another may be inclined question his leadership. Will be noted that many of his most serious problems such as agriculture, missile gap, and situation East Germany, not capable of quick solution and would be rational expect K to seek détente with West for period of at least couple years. This would also be consistent with his basic policy of co-existence. Key to such détente, as K himself has pointed out, is Berlin problem. Difficulty with this analysis is that Soviets not always rational by our standards and always possible K will conclude that to maintain his position at home and deal with Chinese problem abroad he should make radical change in policy. On balance however I consider this unlikely. I also think it unlikely that he will pay our price for real Berlin solution and that present “neither peace nor war” situation will continue. Likely Soviet move on Berlin is another approach to West Germans. While this would probably not succeed, would appear be some possibility of deal in which in return for West German concessions Soviets would get rid of Ulbricht and allow regime develop in East Germany along Polish lines. If some such move not tried or is unsuccessful, I continue believe K will sign his separate treaty but take steps prevent it from bringing on serious conflict with West.

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 761.00/5-462. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London, Paris, and Bonn, and to Athens for Secretary Rusk who was attending the North Atlantic Council meeting.

1 Andrei P. Kirilenko had been appointed to the First Deputy Chairmanship of a Central Committee Bureau at the meeting of the Supreme Soviet beginning April 23.

2 Ivan V. Spiridonov had been elected President of the Supreme Soviet and removed from his post as a Party Secretary.

3 The text of Gardner Cowlesʼ interview with Khrushchev on April 20 is printed in Pravda, April 27, 1962. In commenting on the 2-hour and 40-minute interview, Thompson reported that it was notable for Khrushchevʼs “cautious attitude” on current problems. In response to Cowlesʼ question on a summit meeting, Khrushchev stated that he would be willing to meet the President either at a neutral site or in Moscow, but felt that past wounds to the Soviet Union had not sufficiently healed to make this the best time for Kennedy to visit Moscow. (Telegram 2709 from Moscow, April 20; Department of State, Central Files, 961.6211/4-2062)





189. Memorandum From the Secretary of Stateʼs Special Assistant (Bohlen) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source


Washington, May 7, 1962.

Following the Presidentʼs conversation with me1 on the desirability of taking up, informally, with the Soviets the question of Marshal Malinovskyʼs May Day statement,2 and our conversation on the same subject,1 I found an occasion on Friday afternoon at the Soviet reception to have a few private words with Ambassador Dobrynin.

I told him that Marshal Malinovskyʼs statement on the subject of surprise attack, naming the President of the United States, had been noted here, and seemed to me to be a revision to Stalin-type diplomacy and not in any way conducive to the development of the type of relationships that we were seeking with the Soviet Union.

I reviewed with him the history of the Saturday Evening Post article,3 pointing out that, in effect, President Kennedy had merely restated the policy in this regard which had been that of the previous Administration, but that due to an imprecisely written account in the article, was susceptible of misunderstanding. I emphasized that the White House had immediately issued a clarification4 to set any misinterpretation straight, but that apparently the Soviet Government preferred to pick up the wrong interpretation and give it widest publicity through an important speech by their Minister of Defense, on May Day. I added that there were enough problems confronting our two countries without deliberately trying to increase misunderstanding by a false interpretation, which I felt was the case in regard to Malinovskyʼs speech.

Dobrynin did not attempt to defend the Malinovsky speech beyond saying that he did not know its origin, and appeared to feel that it was perhaps a mistake. He, however, did state that “they” had been very much surprised at the attribution to the President in the Saturday Evening Post article and had wondered whether the President was trying to strike out on a new nuclear policy for the United States. He admitted that they perhaps should have paid more attention to the White House clarification, but did not dwell on it. I told him that if there were any points of this nature which were unclear, he had access to various people in the Department of State or elsewhere from which he would be able to receive a true account, with which he agreed.

The conversation was completely calm and friendly, and I gathered that Dobrynin was somewhat embarrassed by Malinovskyʼs reference to the President, but he also retained enough of typical Soviet suspicion to have believed in the possibility of a highly contrived method of presenting a policy departure with the White House clarification part of this subtle performance. Operating as they do under a highly disciplined centralized authority, they find it very difficult to believe in the quality of accident in any public statement on policy.

CEB



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series,USSR. Confidential.

1 Not further identified.

2 The text of Malinovskyʼs May Day statement is printed in Pravda, May 9, 1962. The Soviet Marshal reiterated these views in the May issue of Kommunist. The Embassy in Moscow commented that the statement was noteworthy for its effort to perpetuate the myth that President Kennedy was prepared to initiate a preventive nuclear war against the Communist bloc. (Telegram 2828 from Moscow, May 8; Department of State, Central Files, 761.00 May Day/5-162)

1 Not further identified.

3 See footnote 1, Document 179.

4 Parts of this clarification, issued by Salinger on March 27, are quoted in The New York Times, March 28, 1962.





190. Memorandum for the RecordSource


Washington, May 7, 1962, 5:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Memorandum of Meeting with The President, 5:30—Monday—May 7, 1962



The meeting consumed an hour and 15 minutes, attended by the President, McCone and General Maxwell Taylor, the latter being present at McConeʼs request.

[Here follows unrelated material.]

5. McCone reported on the fact that further study of most recent Corona mission which was basis of briefing of Macmillan, the President, and McNamara on April 28th,1 had disclosed that additional Soviet ICBMs which now total 81 in being or under construction and MRBMs which now total 440 located sites in being or under construction. We are not raising our mid-62 estimate but the President was told that the matter was under review and that we will probably raise our mid-63 estimate of Soviet capabilities. McCone furthermore reported that after one more Corona shot scheduled for May, the National Board would review all available data.2 Furthermore, 10 additional Corona shots are scheduled for the summer and upon conclusion of this series, the National Board would make another review and possibly a new estimate which would be ready in October or November. McCone reported that most recent Corona failed because the parachute did not open and the most recent Samos was lost. The President was further advised that Discoverer units were being purchased in sufficient number to carry on the program through ʼ62 and into ʼ63, if trouble developed with Samos.

McCone reviewed the attached memorandum3 on the number of operational U.S. ICBMs and Polaris missiles, stating that the figures were approximate but representative of the order of magnitude of our own situation. He advised the President that on the basis of these figures and known Soviet effort, there would not be a “missile gap” in the future. However, there is a wide disparity between the Soviet MRBM capability and that of the West. The question of the ʼ58, ʼ59, ʼ60 estimates which created the illusion of the missile gap was raised with the President. General Taylor defended the estimates for those years on the basis of conclusions drawn from all intelligence which was then available to the Intelligence Community and to the military.

[Here follows unrelated material.]

John A. McCone4

Director



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DCI (McCone) Files: Job 80-B01285A. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by McCone on May 8.

1 McCone summarized the April 28 briefing in a memorandum of discussion, April 30. McCone noted that, following the briefing, “the President asked whether our recent photography caused a change in our estimates. McNamara answered no, that our ʼ62 and ʼ63 estimates remain. I however took a different position. I stated there were now 76 ICBM launching pads located and there were probably some which we had not located. Some were completed, the majority apparently under construction. I pointed out our mid-62 estimate was 35 to 50 ICBMs on pads and ready to go. I now felt we have to accept the higher figure as the minimum.” (Ibid.)

2 On July 6 the intelligence community issued NIE 11-8-62, “Soviet Capabilities for Long Range Attack.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. VIII, pages 332-342.

3 Not printed.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.





191. Editorial Note


On May 10, 1962, Ambassador to Laos Winthrop Brown informed the Department of State in telegram 1534 from Vientiane that the military situation in Laos continued to deteriorate. The seizure of the provincial capital city of Nam Tha and its subsequent rapid exploitation by Pathet Lao/Viet Minh forces “has transformed what just prior to May 5 had begun to be a somewhat encouraging situation, into a dangerous and ugly one. The collapse of the FAR [Royal Armed Forces] on their retreat from Nam Tha has left the whole of northwest Laos open toPL/Vietminh seizure at their option.” Brown added that the refusal by the Soviets thus far to help rectify the situation was entirely consistent with the theory “that the Soviet desire for a peaceful settlement here has, to say the least, substantially diminished.” Brown argued that he did not see “how we can let this breach of cease-fire agreement and personal undertakings go without some form of positive reaction if the Russians remain indifferent to our protests.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XXIV, pages 735-739.





192. Editorial Note


An internal Department of State memorandum on Communist aims in Southeast Asia, May 11, 1962, prepared by the Deputy Director of the Vietnam Task Force, Chalmers Wood, expressed the opinion that “the Russians think Communism can make gains without local wars. They will back wars of ‘National Liberation’ provided the risks are controllable.” The Chinese Communists, on the other hand, “think local wars are the best way to spread Communism and will accept higher risks.” The memorandum argued against holding an international conference with the Soviets and Chinese on Vietnam, asserting that U.S. participation in such a conference would be seen as an “act of weakness.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume II, pages 387-389.

Another internal Department of State memorandum, prepared about the same time by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, discussed the international implications of the Joint Chiefs of Staff proposal to establish a military “command structure for US forces being moved to Thailand and the Southeast Asian area in connection with the situation in Laos.” The memorandum contended that Moscow understood and gave credence to U.S. claims that its military buildup in Southeast Asia was for a limited purpose only, but that Peiping and Hanoi were “more directly concerned than Moscow, and we think they are more apt to view our assertions with a jaundiced eye.” For text, see ibid., pages 390-393.





193. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet UnionSource


Washington, May 12, 1962, 3:49 p.m.

2571. To Ambassador for Salinger from Bundy. The President wants to be sure that no impression is given that you have come to Moscow to talk substantive matters with Khrushchev. Therefore, in any public discussion of your meetings with him you should take the following line: first, the meetings were informal and took place entirely at the Chairmanʼs initiative; second, your own discussion of substantive matters was confined entirely to the field of wider exchanges of information, such as the proposed TV exchange; and third, the rest of the conversation on your side was entirely informal and personal.

If the conversation was limited in the same way on Khrushchevʼs side, you should emphasize that fact. But if Khrushchev has used the occasion for a serious presentation of his substantive views, and if you believe that this fact will become known in Moscow, you should make it plain that while the Chairman expressed certain substantive views to you, you confined yourself to listening, because you had no authority from the President to engage in any policy discussions.1



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 101/5-1262. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Bundy. According to Salinger, when he, Sorensen, and Akalovsky arrived at Sheremetyevo Airport late in the afternoon on May 11, they were met by Ambassador Thompson who told Salinger that he was going to spend the next day with Khrushchev. (Salinger, With Kennedy, p. 222) Since he had not been expecting to talk with Khrushchev, Salinger, after a quick briefing at the Embassy, cabled the President for instructions. No copy of this telegram has been found. The source text is the White House response.

1 Source text not signed.





194. Editorial Note


On May 12, 1962, Walt Rostow, Chairman of the Department of Stateʼs Policy Planning Council, recommended in a memorandum to Secretary of State Rusk that the United States “inform Moscow that we are counting on continued Soviet support for the Laos solution agreed between us at the highest level; i.e., a neutral, independent Laos. We have moved the politics of the RLG in this direction and are prepared to move them further. But the role of North Vietnam in Laos, in the context of the Nam Tha engagement, is unacceptable to us, as is the North Vietnam role in South Vietnam.” Rostow wrote further that “Soviet behavior suggests that they have agreed to let Hanoi and Peiping experiment with extended aggression in Laos; but there is no indication that they [the Soviets] are prepared to let their prestige become involved or their freedom of action be determined by others in a U.S.-Hanoi or U.S.-Peiping military engagement.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume II, pages 393-395.

In a second memorandum to Rusk, May 31, Rostow urged that, in addition to issuing firm statements of policy and making public the “crucial role of North Vietnamese forces in Laos, as well as in South Viet-Nam,” the United States “propose to inflict selective damage on North Viet-Nam for its aggression beyond its borders until that aggression ceases. I do not have in mind here massive bombing of Hanoi. I do have in mind highly selective attack on transport and power facilities, by precision methods, which are now within our capability, plus some mining of Haiphong harbor.” Rostow acknowledged that there were risks involved but contended that “the internal situation in both North Viet-Nam and Communist China, plus the relatively favorable balance of nuclear strength between the US and the Soviet Union, and the Sino-Soviet split, make this as good a time to face this risk as any we are likely to confront in this decade.” For text, see ibid., pages 432-433.





195. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, May 13, 1962, 1 a.m.

2935. Eyes only President. Following is more complete account of meeting with Khrushchev.1 Sorensen, Akalovsky and I spent night at Dacha Ogorevo some 20 miles outside Moscow. Also there were Adzhubei, Kharlamov, Zamyatin,2 and Mr and Mrs Victor Sukhodrev. In morning we were joined by Mrs Adzhubei and two smallest children and Mr and Mrs Yuri Zhukov and Mrs Zamyatin. K appeared about 11:30 and we immediately went for motor boat ride on Moscow River. This and subsequent 5-mile hike through woods was limited to pleasantries and explanations of Soviet horticulture. We sat down to lunch about 2 pm. K immediately brought up subject of Adenauerʼs statements on Berlin. [Here follow the remainder of this paragraph and 6 more paragraphs on Berlin.]

Following lunch K indicated he wanted have private conversation with me and he brought in Sukhodrev. He said he wanted take opportunity my presence to make historical review of relations Soviet Govt with this administration. First he wanted tell me he had never been impressed by Nixon whom he considered intellectually shallow. He said prior to election Lodge, with whom he had had very friendly relations and with whom he had enjoyed traveling around US, had made overtures through certain Soviet contacts of his to have K release RB-47 pilots. He said he was cognizant that to have done that would have won election for Nixon. He had determined in his mind that Kennedy would make better President and he said also determined that if Kennedy was elected he would immediately release RB-47 pilots in order improve relations with new administration. He went on to say he had enjoyed meeting President at Vienna whom he had found most vigorous and forceful advocate of his country, very able man who was trying to see new ways through old problems. He said in year since Vienna there had been great improvement in American public opinion and he had also noticed improvement West German public opinion. He was particularly grateful President had received his daughter Rada and his son-in-law Adzhubei. He said no other recent President would have made such generous gesture toward Soviet Union. He then went on to say Berlin problem was central issue that divided US andUSSR and solution this problem would bring about solution all other problems that involved two countries. He said he was not sure US was sincere on subject of disarmament and nuclear test ban. Soviet Union really wanted achieve disarmament. I interrupted him to say I knew US would not have gone forward and tested had it been able arrange agreement on test ban with Soviet Union and further that President had stated only several months ago at press conference that he considered failure achieve test ban agreement as greatest failure his first year in office.3 K said he was sorry hear that because if that was Presidentʼs position we would never arrive at agreement because SU would never tolerate inspection posts on its territory. Inspection had to be done by nations without use of permanent inspection posts.

In a discussion about lines of communication K expressed highest confidence in Dobrynin and said any information passed to Dobrynin for him would get to him directly.K also expressed great confidence in Amb Thompson with whom he said he had had best possible relations.

We briefly discussed proposed Khrushchev-Kennedy TV exchanges. K said he was for them but said he did not think they could go forward now. He said under present situation he would have to take hard line and he preferred wait until such time that both his and Presidentʼs TV speeches could be constructive. He closed discussion by suggesting we have luncheon again tomorrow and invite Amb Thompson but on arriving back at house he was talked out of this idea by Adzhubei. I told K that because there was no other American present during our discussions it would be helpful to me to have transcription of conversation Sukhodrev had prepared from his notes andK ordered Sukhodrev to give me transcript as quickly as possible. Sukhodrev promised to give me transcript in Russian tomorrow morning.

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/5-1362. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. For another account of Salingerʼs meetings with Khrushchev on May 12 and 13, see With Kennedy, pp. 223-237. Transcripts of the private conversation are in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Trips and Conferences Series, Salinger Trip to the USSR, and Department of State, Central Files, 101/5-1562, as transmitted in telegram 2965 from Moscow, May 15. A copy of Sorensenʼs account of the visit is in the Kennedy Library, Salinger Papers, Box 154.

1 Salinger had transmitted the highlights of his conversations with Khrushchev on May 12 in telegram 2934 from Moscow, May 12. (Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/5-1262)

2 Leonid M. Zamyatin, Deputy Chief of the American Countries Division, Soviet Foreign Ministry.

3 For a transcript of the Presidentʼs press conference on January 15, 1962, at which this statement was made, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1962, pp. 15-23.





196. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, May 18, 1962, noon.

3000. From Embassy point of view Salinger visit was useful, particularly in development contacts with top personalities Soviet information media. Although no immediate results in facilitating communications, believe Soviets somewhat softened up for future progress. It was quite clear that Soviet policy remains on dead center and that Salingerʼs contacts not free at this time to make any significant new moves. Adzhubei several times referred to current tense situation in our relations.

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 101/5-1862. Secret; Limit Distribution.





197. Editorial Note


On May 19, 1962, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, in a memorandum to Secretary of Defense McNamara, expressed their views on seven issues relating to the draft treaty outline on disarmament. The Joint Chiefs were “convinced that disarmament without full verification of retained armament would jeopardize our national security.” They pointed out that “since late 1961 there has been continuing pressure to negotiate the reduction of US nuclear capabilities in isolation of other proposed disarmament measures. Success in this effort would seriously reduce the major military advantage we now enjoy and drastically alter our military posture. Further there is a danger of US positions being weakened by proposals which have been submitted in attempts to make them more ‘negotiable’ by approaching the Soviet positions.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 456-457.





198. Editorial Note


In a meeting with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin in Washington on May 30, 1962, Secretary of State Rusk argued that the two sides were unlikely to agree soon on the principles of a lasting agreement on Berlin. To avoid confrontation, they should agree to disagree and focus on learning to live with that fact as they continued to work for a permanent settlement. For text of the portion of the memorandum of conversation dealing with Germany and Berlin, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XV, pages 161-172.

At the same meeting the Secretary told Dobrynin that “organically, there was no connection between Berlin and disarmament negotiations, but in the broadest political sense it was inevitable that these matters should influence each other. A crisis over Berlin would obviously have the gravest implications for disarmament.” Dobrynin responded that he “could agree that there was no direct connection between disarmament and the Berlin problem, but that they were related.” For text of this portion of the memorandum of conversation, see ibid., volume VII, pages 459-460.

For Dobryninʼs brief account of his meetings with Rusk on Berlin and Germany during this period, see his memoir, In Confidence, page 63.





199. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, May 31, 1962, 1 p.m.

3102. At Kremlin reception for Keita last night just as my wife and I were preparing to leave Furtseva1 asked why we did not invite Khrushchev to attend Goodman concert. I explained I had not done so as this would result in considerable publicity which I had assumed he would wish to avoid in this connection. She urged nevertheless that it would do no harm to ask him, which I did, explaining reason for not having done so earlier for which he expressed understanding and appreciation. He said he would come if Kremlin reception ended early enough. He turned up accompanied by his wife, Kozlov, Mikoyan and Kosygin and stayed for first half of concert. There being no private box at this theatre, row of seats on raised sector had been hastily cleared for Khrushchev party and he invited my wife and myself to join them there. Audience showed great interest in Khrushchevʼs reaction and he in theirs. Kozlov remarked on obvious audience recognition of various numbers and spontaneous applause as they were begun, somewhat in pride at its sophistication. With exception of Kosyginʼs wife, however, Presidium members had no understanding of jazz and K told me afterwards that he did not dance and did not understand jazz but admired skill of musicians. Change in attitude toward jazz during 5 years I have been here is remarkable and Kʼs presence last night will doubtless be great boon to jazz lovers here.

Significance of event is that despite their own lack of understanding and even dislike of jazz music, Soviet leadership has yielded to popular pressure, particularly of Soviet youth. This is probably most striking evidence that public opinion is beginning to play some role in Soviet affairs.

Adzhubei, who was in Kʼs party and attended my reception afterward, said he hoped President Kennedy would attend Bolshoi Ballet performance and that Kʼs presence was gesture toward President.

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 761.13/5-3162. Confidential; Limit Distribution.

1 Yekaterina F. Furtseva, Soviet Minister of Culture.





200. Editorial Note


A memorandum for the Special Group charged with responsibility for fostering insurrection in Cuba (Operation Mongoose), May 31, 1962, noted that at its meeting on March 22, Attorney General Robert Kennedy had asked “what would be an appropriate course of action for the United States to take in the event that the Soviets establish a military base in Cuba.” The memorandum noted the Department of Defenseʼs concern over the issue and proposed that each participating agency prepare a written response to Kennedyʼs question. For text of the memorandum, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963 volume X, page 824.





201. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Dutton) to the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Fulbright)Source


Washington, June 8, 1962.

Dear Mr. Chairman: I wish to thank you for your letter of March 9, 1962, requesting the comments of the Department with regard to Senate Concurrent Resolution 63.1 This Resolution would request the President to take action to bring before the United Nations a resolution calling for the withdrawal from the Baltic states of the forces of the Soviet Union, the punishment of persons guilty of crimes against the peoples of the Baltic states, and the extension of the principles of self-determination to the Baltic states.

The Department of State understands and sympathizes fully with the motives which prompted the submission of Senate Concurrent Resolution 63. We have consistently recognized and upheld the right of the Baltic peoples to national independence and to the enjoyment of all fundamental rights and freedoms. Our interest in their cause is deep and abiding, and the Department of State has given constant attention over the years to policies and courses of action designed to convey this interest to the peoples of these areas.

We do not believe the policy of this Government is at issue in this matter. The real question is how the policy of our Government can most effectively be served. It is our view that such action on the part of the United States as is called for by the resolutions under discussion would not win any sizeable support in the General Assembly. An important reason for this is that the great majority of the United Nations Members do not follow the position of the United States in not recognizing the forced incorporation of the Baltic states into the USSR. Moreover, our action in introducing such a resolution would be regarded by many Members as a “cold war” initiative, and would thus lose much of the support it truly merits. Finally, the defeat of such a resolution in the United Nations would unfortunately be regarded as a real victory for the Soviet Union.

In view of these circumstances, the Department of State is forced to recommend against the passage of Senate Concurrent Resolution 63.

The Bureau of the Budget advises that, from the standpoint of the Administrationʼs program, there is no objection to the presentation of this report for the consideration of the Committee.

Sincerely yours,

For the Secretary of State:

Frederick G. Dutton2



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 761.00/3-962. No classification marking. Drafted by William J. Barnsdale (EUR/EE) on March 16.

1 A copy of Fulbrightʼs letter has not been found. For text of the resolution, introduced by Senator Lausche on March 8, but not acted upon by the Committee, see Congressional Record, March 8, 1962, Concurrent Resolutions.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.





202. Editorial Note


On March 7, 1962, President Kennedy sent a message to Chairman Khrushchev proposing a series of common projects in the exploration of space (Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VI, pages 116-118). On March 20 Khrushchev responded favorably to the idea and suggested that U.S. and Soviet representatives consult during the United Nations Space Committee meeting in New York “to discuss concrete questions of cooperation in research and peaceful use of outer space that are of interest to our countries.” (Ibid., pages 127-131)

In talks at New York, March 27, 28, and 30, Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and A.A. Blagonravov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences reached a tentative basis for further discussion on cooperation on meteorological satellites, telemetry, and the mapping of the earthʼs magnetic field. A copy of Drydenʼs report on the talks and the papers he gave Blagonravov on the three subjects is in Department of State, Central Files, 911.80261/4-562. Following an abortive attempt to reach further agreement in Washington at the beginning of May, Dryden and Blagonravov resumed their discussions on May 29 at Geneva during the course of the United Nations Outer Space Subcommittee meetings. On June 8 they reached agreement covering cooperation on meteorology, arrangements for measuring the earthʼs magnetic field, and the use of the U.S. Echo satellite for experiments in telecommunications. For text of the agreement, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pages 1328-1332.

Following Drydenʼs return from Geneva, Under Secretary of State McGhee convened a meeting with representatives of the White House, NASA, the Defense Department, CIA, and the Air Force. This meeting reviewed the discussion in Geneva and agreed to propose to the President the following: “1. After a reasonable interval and if no serious objections have been raised by any of the interested agencies, Dr. Dryden will inform Professor Blagonravov that we have no changes to suggest in their joint memorandum. (The memorandum provided for a two-month waiting period during which either party could propose changes.)

“2. Upon notification from Professor Blagonravov that the Soviets do not desire changes which would be unacceptable to us (or at the conclusion of the two-month waiting period), we will, assuming the Soviets still wish to proceed, exchange notes with the Soviet Government to confirm government-level agreement to these proposals.

“3. It was suggested that when that agreement has been obtained, you may wish to write to Chairman Khrushchev noting both the agreement to proceed with the specific arrangements at hand and the prospects of further technical discussions on additional topics. A draft of such a letter will be submitted for your approval.

“4. Meanwhile, Under Secretary McGhee and Dr. Dryden will report these developments to members of Congress who have a specific interest and responsibility in this field, and the Department will prepare a report to be sent to the Secretary General of the United Nations when formal agreement has been reached with the Soviets.

“5. Dr. Dryden will, in cooperation with the interested agencies, proceed now to arrange nominations for US membership in the joint US-Soviet working groups which are to develop the detailed implementation of the meteorological and geomagnetic proposals. These working groups will not, however, be activated until formal agreement has been reached with the Soviet Government.

“6. The joint Dryden-Blagonravov memorandum will be treated as confidential, pending government-level agreement by the Soviets or earlier Soviet public release.

“7. After formal agreement has been obtained, Dr. Dryden will arrange directly with Professor Blagonravov for further technical discussions, possibly in Moscow this fall, concerning broader cooperation in communication via satellites and the possibility of cooperation in such of the remaining topics dealt with in your exchange of letters with Chairman Khrushchev as may seem worthwhile to pursue further.” (Memorandum from Ball to the President, July 5; Department of State, Central Files, 911.80261/7-562)





On July 18, in NSAM No. 172, Bundy informed the Secretary of State that the President had concurred in this general approach and requested the responsible agencies to carry out the steps in paragraphs 1-7. (Ibid., NSAMs: Lot 72 D 316)





203. Editorial Note


In Special National Intelligence Estimate 58-5/1-62, “Communist Reactions to Additional US Courses of Action in Laos and North Vietnam,” issued June 12, 1962, the intelligence community predicted increased Soviet and Chinese materiel, arms, and political support for North Vietnam if the United States attacked supply bases in Laos or launched either air attacks or amphibious action against North Vietnam. For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume II, pages 445-447.





204. Editorial Note


In a June 21, 1962, memorandum to the President on Berlin, Secretary of Defense McNamara stated that he felt “certain that our improved military position and our firm response to provocation have had a major influence on Soviet attitudes. From the beginning Khrushchev has sought to develop his campaign against Berlin in such a way as to avoid serious risk of general war.” While the Soviets were not likely to try to precipitate a crisis around Berlin, McNamara continued, neither were they likely to modify their positions to allow a political agreement to be reached. For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XV, pages 192-195.

On July 5 the President received a message from Chairman Khrushchev which proposed the elimination of Western military forces in Berlin and their replacement by “UN police military formations” composed of troops from the three Western allies, neutral states, and small Warsaw Pact and NATO states. The UN forces would be reduced in size by 25 percent each year and removed by the end of the fourth year. This would happen in the context of an agreement that also solved the larger German issues. A week later Secretary of State Rusk and Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin discussed Khrushchevʼs letter, which Rusk dismissed as a repetition of previous Soviet positions. On July 17 the President replied to Khrushchev, stating that what the U.S. found “especially troubling in the present Soviet position is the consistent failure, even in the very formulation of the problem, to take any real account of what we have made clear are the vital interests of the United States and its Allies.” For text of the Khrushchev and Kennedy letters and the memorandum of the Rusk- Dobrynin conversation, see ibid., pages 207-212, 215-222, and 224-229.





205. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Foreign Minister GromykoSource


Washington, June 30, 1962.

Dear Mr. Gromyko: Upon return from a ten-day absence in Europe, I find that it is now generally known that Ambassador Thompson will be leaving Moscow this summer. The inevitable result will be increasing speculation about his successor. Our Embassy will shortly request an agrement for Mr. Foy D. Kohler and I should greatly appreciate your assistance in a prompt response in order that the President may end press speculation through an early announcement.

Mr. Kohler is well known to high officials of your Government and we are pleased that he will be available for this assignment. A distinguished career officer familiar with the Soviet Union and the Russian language, he has worked on the most intimate terms with President Kennedy and me since we assumed office and knows our thinking thoroughly. I need not add that he brings with him the same full confidence of the President which Ambassador Thompson has enjoyed.

I hope that the forthcoming conference in Laos will be able to move promptly to a mutually satisfactory conclusion and that we can meet soon in Geneva to sign an agreement which will mark an important step in our relations.1

With personal good wishes,

Sincerely yours,

Dean Rusk2



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Chron. Confidential. Drafted by Rusk. The source text is attached to a brief message from Rusk to Dobrynin asking him to transmit it to Gromyko. On June 30 the Department of State sent a similar message to the Embassy in Moscow asking for agrement on Kohler and requesting no publicity until the White House had made an announcement on the appointment. (Telegram 2990; ibid., Central Files, 123 Kohler, Foy D.)

1 On July 4 the Embassy in Moscow reported that the Soviet Government agreed to the appointment of Kohler. (Telegram 19 from Moscow; ibid.)

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.





206. Editorial Note


A memorandum of July 3, 1962, on the “Cuban Situation,” prepared by the Central Intelligence Agencyʼs Office of Current Intelligence, stated that “Cubaʼs main difference from the Soviet satellites lies in the absence of an explicit Soviet commitment to defend Cuba militarily.” The memorandum added that “Soviet statements in this sense have thus far been vague and general.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume X, pages 835-842.





207. Memorandum of Conversation Between the Presidentʼs Advisor on Disarmament (McCloy) and the Soviet Ambassador (Dobrynin)Source


Washington, July 3, 1962, 1 p.m.

After several invitations to confer with the Ambassador, I finally accepted a luncheon date for July 3rd. He asked me to choose the place and I suggested the Russian Embassy.

The luncheon and the after-luncheon talk lasted until about 2:30 p.m. (beginning at 1:00 p.m.).

He first spoke of a message he had from Khrushchev to me, which according to Dobrynin, was to carry his (Khrushchevʼs) good wishes to me and my family. He also said that he had been asked by Menshikov to be remembered to me.

The first thing he asked about was the economic situation. He wanted to know what I thought of consequences of the stock market collapse—its cause and effect and I told him what I thought, namely, that we were in a bear market of rather definite proportions and it would affect business. It remained to be seen I thought whether it would result in a real lack of confidence which would deeply affect the economy.

He was inquisitive about the steel price episode.1 I told him I thought the steel action was maladroit but that the President had overreacted. This had been the immediate cause of the sharp realization that with the squeeze on profits, stock prices were far too high. He then asked about the Common Market—why had we been in favor of it and why were we still pressing for its development and Great Britainʼs entry? Did this not all tend to increase competition for us in the way of business and act also as a dilution of our power position in the world? I replied that with the continuation of the tariff barriers in Western Europe, with the foreshortening of time and travel and the great increase of speed of communication, it was anachronistic to continue with the old system. It was this realization by a number of thinking people which brought it about. We had been called on to participate in two World Wars by reason of German-French tensions and it was natural for us to seek greater stability in this part of the world. Our power might be diluted and the competition might be severe but we were not disposed to keep others weak in order to maintain our position. He indicated that they were puzzled by our attitude in this respect and had a hard time to find an explanation. I told him I did not think they need seek for any other explanation than what I had indicated.

Next he asked about tax reduction—How was it possible with all the threat of a deficit? He was aware of the talk about the beneficial aspects of a deficit but this was hard to believe and particularly difficult to accept in the light of the balance of payments position of the United States. I told him that I thought he had asked a good question. We were in a tight position with the squeeze on profits, with ever-increasing labor costs and our rather savage income tax on both corporations and individuals. It was complicated by the balance of payments problem but the theory was that a reduction of taxes would release money for investment and expansion, introduce more flexibility in our economic system, etc. This stimulation would, in the end, result in just as substantial government revenues and would result in a return to confidence that other governmental measures might fail to produce. I told him I felt our taxes were too high, interfered with incentives and produced all manner of anomalies in commercial transactions. A tax reduction might have a real stimulus but the danger of a larger deficit and its threat to the dollar was in my judgment very real. He then asked about the attitude I had in regard to the extension of nuclear power to other countries. This, said he, troubled them greatly—would this not certainly increase the danger of nuclear war? I said I thought it would and, as I understood it, so did the United States Government. He indicated that he sensed some relaxation of our opposition to such a trend. I said I could only refer him to the Government for the answer to this question. I knew of no such “relaxation.”

At this point I said I wanted to ask him some questions but he said he had one more before I began and that was regarding the status of the Disarmament Advisory Committee. What power did it have, whom did it advise and how many times did it meet? I told him all the answers as I saw them, emphasizing its purely advisory capacity, the character of its advice, its composition, etc.

My first question was as to Mr. Khrushchevʼs recent statements in regard to China. They were rather rasping and I wondered what they really implied. We had made it clear that we were not going to support any adventures on the part of Chiang on the Mainland. Both Rusk and the President had indicated that and if Mr. Khrushchev was really trying to reduce dangerous tensions, why did he not indicate the same thing in regard to his support of Red Chinaʼs incursions against Formosa, Quemoy and Matsu? He replied that it was known that Chiang had real ambitions in regard to the Mainland but they were wholly fanciful as far as Chiang was concerned. They were only serious if the United States supported his ambitions and it was necessary for Mr. Khrushchev to emphasize Soviet support of their alliance with Red China, if any such attempt was made on the Mainland. This, I said, was understandable but the real question was whether the Soviet Union really would support Red China if it sought to mount a military effort against Formosa or the islands. He said that Mr. Khrushchev had to support Maoʼs claims to Formosa. It was to be given to China—even the United States had declared this. I said Mr. Khrushchev could continue to support Red Chinaʼs claims but not by means of force, and he ought to state this renunciation if he wanted really to reduce tensions. Mr. Dobrynin said he got the point and I said the failure of Mr. Khrushchev to give any such indication along these lines made the United States wonder just what the extent of the Soviet Unionʼs commitments were in regard to Formosa and the islands. The President had made the United Statesʼ position clear and if Mr. Khrushchev was serious about relieving tensions here was a point at which to begin. Beyond acknowledging that I had made the point clear to him, he did not volunteer anything more.

Another discussion took place in regard to Berlin. I said I was gaining the impression that Mr. Khrushchev was digging himself in deeper and deeper on the removal of United States troops in Berlin. Mr. Khrushchev must know how important a factor this was in our position and the position of all the Allies. To keep emphasizing this point was endangering a real settlement on Berlin which could be part of a package which might include a number of points of real advantage in the relief of tensions.

If Mr. Khrushchev wanted to diminish the prestige of the United States by demanding the withdrawal of United States troops and the insertion of other troops in West Berlin with no penetration of East Berlin by any foreign troops we would not be getting anywhere according to my view. This is not the time to crystallize positions on this important issue. Mr. Dobrynin must remember we did not throw the challenge to Mr. Khrushchev on Berlin. He did, and he heated it up so much we felt impelled to build up our military position. This annoyed Mr. Khrushchev very much and he stepped up his armament and all this leads us nowhere. There is a real opportunity to work out a solution on Berlin which may not suit Ulbricht but which would relieve tensions but they canʼt be relieved if Mr. Khrushchev is really trying to get us to back down in Berlin which we will not do. I said this was a matter on which I certainly felt very deeply and I felt the American people did. There was, in my judgment, real danger of war over Berlin if it were not handled temperately and there should never be an effort to force the issue. It carried a terrible danger everytime it was attempted. Mr. Dobrynin said he knew this was a sensitive element in our position over Berlin but he did not see why it was that we objected to neutral occupation of West Berlin. The United Nations could do this as it had in the case of the Suez, for example. The danger in Berlin was the confrontation of our two forces. It was the only place in the world where this was so. The necessity was to remove this danger. The fact that Berlin was surrounded by East Germany did not mean that they would ever be disposed to attempt to overrun the United Nations forces in Berlin. They could never agree to any presence of foreign troops in East Berlin because such a repudiation of the Communist regime by the Soviet Union makes it impracticable.

Then, I said, leave the situation as it is with no further attempts to maneuver us out of position. It was not “intolerable.” It was not challenging; people could very well get on in Berlin if it were not for the new challenge. It was, of course, annoying to Ulbricht but who was Ulbricht to allow him to play with fire. If Ulbricht could be gotten rid of, I had the idea the whole situation would be improved greatly.

The West Germans would be much more forthcoming in regard to East Germany, etc. He suggested we get rid of Adenauer. I said this might be possible if we had controlled the elections in West Germany as they did in East Germany.

I referred to the Wall as a terrible acknowledgment of weakness. This symbol of war and concentration camps was sinister, out of place and a dreadful admission of weakness in that people had to be locked in their own home country to keep them there.

He said that it was only natural to erect such a Wall—there were barriers at every border crossing. I said I knew of only one such penitentiary wall on any boundary. He said a number of people in the United States Government had indicated to him that the Wall was a welcome stabilizing factor.

I said I did not agree. It was just too unnatural and sinister. It induced violence and hatred. It should be disposed of soon.

I then talked to him about disarmament. I said I had come reluctantly to the conclusion that the Soviet was interested in disarmament only as a propaganda weapon. He asked me why I thought this because he thought they had made it clear they were the worldʼs foremost advocate in urging disarmament. I said they had urged it all right but all last summer while they were talking test ban, they were intensively preparing for tests and had not the slightest intention of reaching any agreement on a ban at all. He must understand what distrust this sowed. Mr. Khrushchev, at the Black Sea, during my visit with him,2 had accused the United States of secretly preparing for tests while we were negotiating. I had then told Mr. Khrushchev that if he cared to, he could send experts over to our proving grounds to examine into just what we were doing, provided we could do the same with our experts on their side. Mr. Khrushchev said this was not “practicable.” It is now apparent why it was not “practicable” and I did not feel that on this matter Mr. Khrushchev had been frank with me. The Soviet antipathy to a reasonable form of inspection and verification likewise impelled me to believe that the Soviets only wanted the sound of disarmament and not the reality because anyone really desirous of true disarmament must accept as a logical concomitant of it a system of inspection and verification based on something more than faith. It also implied acceptance of some international arbitraments, of which the Soviet representatives all fought shy. Furthermore, I said, I had never talked with any national leader who talked so much about his weapons as did Mr. Khrushchev. He seemed enamored of them; it was like a farmer with a new set of tractors or farm implements. These were my reasons for disillusionment regarding the true intent of Soviet disarmament proposals.

He said he had to admit the testing last summer did cast doubts on Soviet intentions regarding the test ban negotiations but they did wish disarmament and perhaps the best thing to do now was reach an agreement on disarmament in space. It was a field not yet preempted and though it might not have great immediate military implications, it might be something definite and helpful toward other agreements. I said I felt it was a thing which we ought to attempt and accomplish quickly and decisively.

He said it might also lead to fruitful cooperation in the space field and I said I thought this would be highly desirable. He then talked of a test ban agreement indicating he thought the general and complete disarmament plan carried implications that neither side might want to adopt for the time being. Why did we not agree to a ban in all elements relying on national detection systems only but doing what we wished to do by way of preparation?

We might not detect all underground explosions. He thought it could be done. His scientists thought they knew about all United States underground tests and he felt sure we could detect any they exploded. I said our experts vigorously disagreed; that with our type of society the Soviet Union could rely on getting information of such testing much more readily than we could from the Soviet Union. Why this pathology regarding inspection? Why is it so bad? Why is it that this is such a stumbling block to actual accomplishments? He did not answer these questions directly but always stressed Soviet proposals for reliance on national observance systems as the best method of attack leaving it to each government to use as much effort as it wanted to in the way of preparation for tests in case of a breach by the other side. I said this was playing in the dark which always gave rise to suspicion and it did not appeal to me as being constructive. Throughout our talk on disarmament I gained the impression he believed in tackling some things that could be done rather promptly leaving the general and complete disarmament and all its ramifications to a later stage.

I said that this was just what we were advocating but the Russians at Geneva seemed to be taking the position through Zorin that it was all or nothing. If this was a change in the Soviet position, I thought the United States would be glad to respond.

I asked whether it made sense to continue to go on talking at Geneva going round and round the mulberry bush. Was it too much to ask whether there was any present desire for a disarmament program on the part of the Soviet Union which would not significantly increase Russian strength in relation to ours?

Why I asked did the reversal on war propaganda take place at Geneva? What harm could have come from agreeing to a ban on it? Was this Chinese pressure? Was it because Red China decried the abandonment of the doctrine that war was inevitable between the Communist and the Free World? Iʼd like to know and I'm sure the world would like to know. He indicated he did not know the answers to these questions and I did not press.

He then asked me why there seemed to be such deep hostility to the United Nations among the Congress and the people. He had the feeling as did most members of the Soviet Union that the United Nations was controlled by the United States, so why get mad at it. It had stood in the way of innumerable Soviet policies yet it had become an institution of great distrust in the United States.

Why was this? Why was it that the Southwest seemed to be particularly hostile? Why does the Birch Society have such strength in that area? I told him not to mistake some senatorial and extreme right criticism of the United Nations as representative of general feeling. I had heard that the Gallup polls had indicated a very wide support of the United Nations in the United States. I thought the criticism of the United Nations came largely from the frequent use of the Soviet veto and the fear that irresponsible and immature nations may form blocs or groups which would induce irresponsible and perhaps dangerous action but the general support of the United Nations in spite of frustrations was still deep-seated in the United States.

Throughout the visit, Mr. Dobrynin was affable, courteous and gave the impression of being rather frank and forthcoming. The text will show, however, that he did not open the door to any major developments in our relations with his country. He indicated he would like to call on me in New York. He also asked my advice as to where he could go in the summer relatively nearby “but where it was a little cooler than Virginia.”

JMc



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/7-362. No classification marking.

1 On April 10 Roger Blough, Chairman of the Board of U.S. Steel, had announced a raise in steel prices of $6 per ton. The President regarded this as inflationary and in 3 days convinced Blough to rescind the price raise.

2 See Document 109.





208. Editorial Note


On July 6, 1962, the intelligence community issued National Intelligence Estimate 11-8-62, “Soviet Capabilities for Long Range Attack,” which sought “to estimate probable trends in the strength and deployment of Soviet weapon systems suitable for long range attack” over the next 5 years. The estimate concluded, among other things, that the Soviets were placing greater emphasis “on forces for intercontinental attacks, especially ICBMs” and were “attempting to improve their capabilities for both preemptive and retaliatory action, by measures designed to shorten reaction times and increase survivability.” The estimate noted further that, given the quickening tempo of the ICBM program, “the present relatively modest force level of about 50 operational launchers will probably grow substantially, reaching some 125-175 launchers in mid-1963 and 200-300 in mid-1964.” The estimate also concluded that “with the long range striking forces we estimate it will have in the mid-1960ʼs, however, the USSR could not expect to destroy the hardened, airborne, seaborne, and fast reaction nuclear delivery capabilities of the US.” For text of the estimate and the report of the Special Inter-Departmental Committee on Implications of NIE 11-8-62 and Related Intelligence, forwarded to President Kennedy on August 23, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VIII, pages 332-342 and 359-378.





209. Editorial Note


On July 7, 1962, the Department of Defense released preliminary results of a seismic research program, Project Vela, which implied that seismic detection and identification of nuclear tests was perhaps easier to carry out than earlier studies had indicated. Ambassador Dean, arriving in Geneva July 14, reportedly said at the airport that the findings suggested that international detection stations inside the Soviet Union might not be necessary if the United States could get non-nuclear nations to cooperate. Secretary of State Rusk and Acting Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Director Fisher sent Dean a message the same day pointing out that the “position of the Department andACDA, when asked, will continue to be that, while the recent results of the Vela Program are promising and are being evaluated, the evaluation to date has not led to a decision to abandon necessity of control posts in the Soviet Union or reduce the number of on-site inspections.” For more information, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 487-488.





210. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, July 8, 1962, 7 p.m.

56. President First Nat City Bank Moore reports Mikoyan told him July 5 A) USSR anxious increase trade with US. B) Berlin constitutes major obstacle to expanded US-USSR business relations. C) Berlin settlement would be reached. D) USSR short of foreign exchange. E) USSR eager sell raw materials to US at or under world prices. F) Long or short term credits desired.

At Embassy suggestion Moore asked to see “best plant behind Urals.” After Soviets unsuccessfully attempted substitute Donbas visit, Moore flew July 6 to Sverdlovsk, thence by small plane via Chelyabinsk to Magnitogorsk for five hour tour worldʼs largest iron-steel plant.

Moore noted A) “dispersal” of vast industrial complex from Sverdlovsk to Magnitogorsk. B) Huge open pit mines at Chelyabinsk and Magnitogorsk. C) General accuracy of Kish “Economic Atlas of USSR” which he used openly in plane to identify industrial plants, pipelines, power lines. D) Magnitogorsk plant currently produces 10 million tons steel and expansion to 15 mt underway. E) Plant operates under three 8-hour shifts, seven days weekly. F) No surplus labor apparent, workers paid average 200 rubles monthly or about double Moscow factories. G) Magnitogorsk iron ore reserves half depleted, concentration has dropped from 65 percent to 35 percent, but other nearby deposits more than adequate. H) Much new construction underway (uncompleted) in Ural area. I) Plant producing inter alia steel plate for gas lines. J) Hosts claimed USSR produces 40-inch pipe. K) Heavy security precautions, plane followed same circuitous course to and from Sverdlovsk. At request Magnitogorsk director, Moore pointed out shortcomings in plant, principally “maintenance.” “No American company is rich enough to treat equipment like you do”. Hosts agreed state should permit plant retain more profits for maintenance and depreciation.

During week visit USSR Moore met many prominent Soviets including Khrushchev (at July 4 Spasso reception).1 Common Market frequently raised by Soviets. Moore stressed Common Market presented more problems for US than USSR view level trade, told Soviets that US banking circles estimated that one percent increase in Common Market growth rate sufficient to offset injury US domestic industry, refuted Soviet arguments that underdeveloped countries would suffer damage, and assertedUK membership would constitute best protection against frequently expressed Soviet fears of German resurgence.

View Mooreʼs obvious ability, competence as industrial observer and contacts here and at home, Dept may wish consider appropriately high level invitation visit Washington to report his observations.2 Moore preparing notes on flight Moscow-New York July 8.

McSweeney



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 411.6141/7-862. Confidential.

1 In a 7-line telegram on July 4 the Embassy in Moscow reported that Khrushchev, despite the absence of Ambassador Thompson and a heavy schedule connected with the visit of the Austrian Chancellor, had attended the July 4 reception at Spaso (the Ambassadorʼs residence) and stayed for an hour. (Ibid., 811.424/7-462)

2 On July 12 George S. Moore had lunch with Ball and a group of senior Department of State officers. He left with them a general memorandum on his trip to the Soviet Union, a 5-page report on his meeting with Mikoyan, and a report on the visit to Magnitogorsk. Copies of these documents were sent to Bundy on July 16 and included in the Presidentʼs weekend reading. (Memorandum from the Executive Secretary to Bundy; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR)





211. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Dutton) to Senator Kenneth B. KeatingSource


Washington, July 11, 1962.

Dear Senator Keating: I want to thank you for your communication of June 21 requesting information on the situation of the Jews in the Soviet Union for an organization of your constituents deeply concerned with this problem.1

The Department can well appreciate and shares your constituentsʼ distress about the news which has been coming from the Soviet Union with its unfortunate implications for the status of Soviet Jewry. The Department has given considerable thought to this serious problem.

I am sure you are well aware of the increasing evidence of interference in recent years with the Jewish religion in the U.S.S.R. which has been publicized by the national press services, newspapers and other information media, and such organizations as the Synagogue Council of America, B'nai B'rith and Jewish Minorities Research. The desecration of cemeteries, closing of synagogues, dispersing of prayer meetings, arrests of lay leaders, and the prohibition of certain Jewish religious practices have been well established.

It is not clear from the available information whether police action against various individual Jews has its actual basis in anti-Semitism or whether this arises from the presently intensified campaign of the Soviet authorities to stamp out black marketeering, speculation and other economic crimes involving illegal manufacturing, theft or misappropriation of state property, bribery of officials, and other chronic abuses. The majority of the Jews arrested have been accused of such acts, considered criminal under Soviet law, and susceptible to harsh sentences up to and including capital punishment.

It is likewise not possible to determine whether Soviet Jews are deliberately being singled out as Jews for a disproportionate amount of condemnation and victimization. However, a number of the Soviet press accounts of these cases have been written in such a manner as to reflect anti-Semitic attitudes by the authors who hardly would have written in this vein unless they anticipated at least tacit approval of this line by Soviet authorities. The same newspaper accounts, however, which have given prominence to Soviet citizens with Jewish names alleged to have been involved in illegal commercial activities usually have listed Soviet offenders of non-Jewish backgrounds as well. The Soviet newspaper Sovetskaya Kirgiziya of March 25, 1962, in giving a further report about the exposure of widespread illegal economic operations in Frunze reported originally to have involved 54 offenders, listed the names of 33 persons, 15 of whom had identifiable Jewish names.

The long-term Soviet campaign against religion generally and individual religious groups and organizations in particular, although varying in intensity at times, continues unabated. In the post-Stalin period, the major emphases in this campaign have been on intensified atheistic and anti-religious propaganda, the increased application of social pressures, non-violent if sometimes repugnant forms of “persuasion,” administrative restrictions and legal impediments (as in the case of the Moscow ban on matzoth baking) and occasional trials of religious figures or members of religious minorities on ordinary criminal charges. Such trials, publicized so as to discredit both the individuals involved and, indirectly, the religions they represent, also seem intended to coerce or intimidate by example the victimsʼ co-religionists.

The Soviet publication “Party Life” of May 9, 1962, confirms that the Communist Party of the Soviet Union has stepped up the anti-religious activities since the 22nd Party and social organizations have recently strengthened what is described as “scientific-religious propaganda”; that religious sects have been dissolved and that there has been an increase in the number of people who have renounced religious beliefs. Allegedly at the request of former believers, many churches and prayer houses have been closed. The article hints that believers may be prosecuted under the Soviet criminal code in the statement that in violation of Soviet legislation, the leaders of cults engage in religious propaganda beyond the limits of their religious buildings, organize religious rites in the apartments of believers, and attract children to attend services in prayer houses. The standard anti-religious techniques are described as radio and television broadcasts, motion pictures, public lectures, and individual work among believers.

The above methods have not succeeded in stamping out religious beliefs and practices in the Soviet Union. Despite the reports of more forceful action against Soviet Jewry, and other religious groups, it still does not seem that the Soviet authorities have decided to return on a large scale to the extremely repressive methods employed against religious groups and racial minorities during the Stalin era.

We have given serious consideration to the request that the Soviet Government be approached on this problem. The situation of the Jews in the Soviet Union was brought to the attention of the Soviet Government several times in the past, with little positive result. At the time of the Khrushchev visit in September 1959 the Department asked Soviet Ambassador Menshikov to give serious and sympathetic consideration to requests by representatives of American Jewish organizations to arrange a private meeting with Mr. Khrushchev. While no such meeting was arranged, President Eisenhower did bring this matter to Mr. Khrushchevʼs attention during the Camp David discussions. Mr. Khrushchev indicated his awareness of the question but stated that the Jewish people in the Soviet Union are treated like everyone else. The President told Mr. Khrushchev of the concern that had been expressed to him by representatives of the Jewish people in the United States over the situation of the Jews in the Soviet Union. On September 26, 1959, former Secretary of State Herter, in a meeting with the Soviet Foreign Minister, said he wanted to bring to Mr. Gromykoʼs attention the concern which was felt in the United States with respect to the status of Jews in the U.S.S.R. Mr. Gromyko, however, replied that this was an internal matter for the Soviet Government.

It is very difficult for our Government to contribute to the direct solution of the problems of minorities in a territory where a foreign sovereign government exercises full control. Further, and more importantly, it is doubtful if further protestations would be helpful to the Jews in the Soviet Union. The Soviet Government has accused Soviet Jews of being under the influence of foreign governments, including the United States. Further intervention concerning the problems of the Jewish minority in the U.S.S.R. might well redound to the disadvantage of Soviet Jewry.

There are, however, widely recognized goals and standards in the field of human rights, such as those expressed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.2 The force of world opinion has become an important factor to discourage certain governments from pursuing policies which result in the persecution of their own nationals on religious and other grounds. The United States naturally looks with favor on activities by organizations and private individuals which effectively bring such persecution to the notice of world opinion.

In accordance with the principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Department strongly condemns all Soviet violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms. As a result of United States initiative, the Commission on Human Rights has decided to include information from nongovernmental organizations in consultative status in its next series of periodic reports, which will cover the years 1960-62. The reports deal with human rights developments in member states of the U.N. and may therefore provide an opportunity for presenting data on the Soviet repression of religious and minority groups for consideration by the Human Rights Commission.

If I may be of any further assistance to you, please do not hesitate to call on me.

Sincerely yours,

Frederick G. Dutton3



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 761.00/6-2162. No classification marking. Drafted by Richard C. Scissors (P/OPS) and cleared in P, H, andEUR/SOV.

1 Attached, but not printed.

2 For text of this declaration, December 10, 1948, see A Decade of American Foreign Policy: Basic Documents, 1941-1949, pp. 564-567.

3 Signature of the officer who initialed for Dutton is illegible.





212. Editorial Note


At 4 p.m. on July 12, 1962, Ambassador Dobrynin and Secretary of State Rusk discussed Germany, Berlin, and other topics at the Secretaryʼs Office. For text of the memorandum of their conversation on Berlin and Germany, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XV, pages 215-222. During the discussion on Berlin the “Secretary noted the problem of signaling our intentions in such a way as not to create the danger of interpreting these as a willingness to yield on vital points. Referring to the Captive Nations Resolution, the Secretary suggested that, from the point of view of managing these things here with a minimum of controversy in our own country, it was better for the President to handle the subject in a low key. But if this were interpreted in the wrong way in Moscow, it would get into the wrong context. Dobrynin commented that a decision by Congress did not mean that the President must act. The Secretary agreed that there was no way under the Constitution by which the Congress could make action by the President compulsory. But the President had to think of his relations with the Congress and the effect on his entire legislative program. Dobrynin said a strong Soviet reaction was certain. This was a matter which could not help relations between the two countries and was a permanent source of difference.” (Memorandum of conversation; Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/7-1262. For text of the Captive Nations Resolution, July 17, 1959, see 73 Stat. 212)

Secretary of State Rusk also: “noted that a source of misunderstanding between the two countries had been the discussion following the Presidentʼs interview with Stewart Alsop in an issue of the Saturday Evening Post some months ago. Soviet propaganda had stressed, on the basis of this interview, the intention of the US to make a preventive attack on the Soviet Union. Press Secretary Salinger had clarified the related statement in the article immediately. This, the Secretary noted, had not been a direct quotation of the President. What Salinger said is what the US has been saying for 15 years. If there is a massive attack on Western Europe, we will defend ourselves. There is nothing strange in that. If the Soviet misinterpretation is merely a matter of propaganda, we can understand that. If, however, the Soviet Union really believes that we are preparing a preventive attack, that is more serious.

“Dobrynin said the Soviet Union did believe this. It was not just a matter of one article. For many years there had been many articles and many statements by persons in authority. Many Generals had said that the US had bombs that would destroy and would be dropped on the Soviet Union. Then there is the question of the SAC alert. What could the Soviet leaders be expected to believe when statements of this kind were made not just by journalists but by Generals—people with real authority in their hands to begin war. If the US Government wants to stop such statements it can certainly do so. Then the President himself appears in a magazine discussing the possibility of an attack on the Soviet Union. The Soviet concern was therefore not just propaganda. ‘We are really worried about this.’ Perhaps the US thinks that the Soviet Union is too suspicious, but maps appear in magazines showing the planes and missiles allocated for the destruction of each city in the Soviet Union. This information obviously could only come from authoritative sources. There is nothing comparable in the Soviet Union.

“The Secretary asked how many bombs Khrushchev had said would be required to destroy the UK. Dobrynin indicated six or seven. He noted that this story had begun with a conversation with Churchill who had said he did not want war because six or seven bombs would be enough to destroy the UK. Dobrynin had been present at this conversation. The Secretary had observed that the present Administration has taken steps to bring speeches under control. He referred to the recent hearings on the subject conducted by Senator Stennis. It had to be conceded that there was plenty said on both sides. Dobrynin referred again to the American Generals. The Secretary commented that he did not get much comfort from speeches by Marshal Malinovsky. Dobrynin said that he only made one or two a year. In any event this was a reason why the Soviet Union was forced to increase its arms expenditures. Its reaction to American statements was not just propaganda. The Soviet Union had to be prepared.” (Memorandum of conversation; Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/7-1262)

Also during the discussion, Dobrynin said that, “as to nuclear tests, the Soviet Union had felt that the United States had been ahead. It had then caught up, and now the United States was testing again. This was a vicious circle.” Rusk observed “that he had been sorry to see that Khrushchev, in his recent speech, had come back to the point that any kind of inspection was tantamount to espionage.” (Memorandum of conversation; Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 485-487; for text of Khrushchevʼs speech in Moscow on July 10, see Documents on Disarmament, 1962, volume II, pages 635-656)

Secretary of State Rusk also: “referred to a comment which he had made before his recent European trip to the effect that, in all the discussions on the Common Market, there was no indication that these arrangements were being directed toward the Eastern Bloc or Socialist camp. This was certainly his impression after his recent trip. Western Europe was not concerned with economic warfare. It was quite prepared, and we hope we can be prepared, to increase trade.

“Dobrynin asked about the future of US trade with the Soviet Union in view of Congressional attitudes. The Secretary observed that the prejudice of our policy favors trade. We are a trading nation, and we trade unless there is a reason not to. In his recent speech Khrushchev had referred to post-1946 military expenditures. He wished that there were some people in the Soviet Union assigned, perhaps as war-games, to the task of telling the Soviet leaders how Americans thought about things. In 1946 we had greatly reduced the US armed forces. Not a division or air unit was ready for combat. Our Defense budget was about 10 billion dollars. Now it is over four times that much. Why did this come about? It started with Soviet policies during the Stalinist period, the Greek experience etc. The major jump had come at the time of the Korean war. If Khrushchev had not insisted on greatly reducing or eliminating our position in Berlin last summer, the subsequent increase in our forces would not have occurred. If Stalin had not pushed in his time, the US would be disarmed today for all practical purposes. Because of pressures on Berlin, we have strengthened our forces. The Soviets became alarmed and strengthened their forces, and all this in relation to Berlin.

“The President would like to move on trade but people who are opposed to trade with the Soviets are nourished by pressures on Berlin.

“Dobrynin said for the Soviets the Common Market was aimed at creating a deeper split between East and West Europe. The US was a leading member of the Western society. That is why the Soviet Union believed nothing good for the Eastern countries will come from the Common Market. The Secretary commented that we are not members of the Common Market. Dobrynin observed that the US could influence it. This was why he had asked his original question about US trade with the Eastern countries. In view of the sad background of that trade, his country felt that the Common Market would have a very bad impact.” (Memorandum of conversation; Department of State, Secretaryʼs Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330)





213. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, July 19, 1962, noon.

170. At reception for editors yesterday Yuri Zhukov took me aside for farewell talk. He expressed opinion our relations were particularly bad at this time. He said Presidentʼs failure to send message to Peace Congress1 combined with statements in US implying possibility preventive war had made very bad impression here. He pointed out this Congress had allowed full expression of different points of view and said Soviets had difficult time preventing African and other countries from introducing specific anti-colonial themes in final resolution. He said Khrushchev needed help and was faced with strong opposition to his policies. He thought some gesture was needed and in this connection expressed satisfaction that President had personally received Dobrynin.2 In discussion exchange program when I urged increased Soviet tourists to US he suggested proceeding with air transport agreement which he thought would not only increase flow of Soviet tourists but would be important gesture with helpful effect on our relations.3

Zhukov said Soviets had been greatly encouraged by first reports of Project Vela4 but had been dismayed by subsequent statement by Dept Spokesman which appeared to counteract initial statement in Geneva by Dean.5 I said I thought this was simply explained by the fact this highly technical matter and some time was required to evaluate data before they could be translated into political position.

When Zhukov said would be fine thing to reach agreement on testing I said I had always assumed that on this issue Soviets were particularly concerned about possible spread of nuclear weapons to Chinese and West Germans and I had also assumed that Chinese had made clear their unwillingness to go along with any agreement. Zhukov replied with some heat and great emphasis that Soviet Union wanted test ban agreement and neither Chinese nor anyone else would prevent them from concluding one. I said there appeared to be some hope that results of Project Vela would make easier solution of problem of observation posts but it was clear that in cases of doubt on-site inspection would be necessary. Zhukov replied he was aware of this problem and it could be discussed and perhaps resolved by use of neutrals.

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/7-1962. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Geneva.

1 The World Congress on General Disarmament and Peace, which Khrushchev addressed at Moscow on July 10.

2 For a memorandum of Dobryninʼs conversation with the President on July 17, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XV, pp. 223-224.

3 On July 20 President Kennedy called Tyler to ask about going ahead with the air transport agreement. The following day Bohlen called Bundy to say that nothing should be done until the United States had received some commitment from the Soviet Union on West Berlin. (Memorandum to Bundy, July 27; Department of State, Central Files, 611.6194/7-2762) The same day the Department of State informed the Embassy in Moscow along similar lines. (Telegram 200; ibid.)

4 Regarding the Vela project for detecting underground nuclear explosions, see Document 209 and Documents on Disarmament, 1962, vol. II, pp. 633-635.

5 For text of Deanʼs statement before the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee, see ibid., pp. 670-676.





214. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, July 26, 1962, 1 p.m.

227. For security and ease of distribution I have broken down my 2-hour conversation with Khrushchev yesterday morning and 3-hour conversation at dacha in afternoon by subjects reported in following telegrams. This message deals with disarmament and military matters.

In reply to question about his trip north, K said he had observed naval exercises including submarine firing missiles from underwater. He said naval exercise had been carried out in which among other things Soviet submarine was to penetrate Soviet defenses. Submarine was spotted and dummy bomb dropped. It was subsequently discovered that submarine in question not Soviet and he assumed it was either ours or British. K said in time of war nothing could live on water because of modern weapons. Only submarines were of value and even these vulnerable. He said what modern science had been able accomplish was “awful” in real sense of word. He made this remark not in effort to frighten or threaten anyone. He said he always told his military people whenever they showed him some new development that they must realize other side not stupid and able accomplish same thing. He said level of science in both countries about same and what one could do, other could also do.

Throughout conversation K made many references to U-2.

In discussing disarmament I said I could not understand why Soviets had not given serious consideration to our zonal plan of inspection. I said this was serious effort on our part to meet their preoccupation with secrecy and to meet their insistence that amount of inspection be related to amount of disarmament. Our whole effort in this field seemed breaking down because of Soviet obsession with secrecy which I believe based on outmoded analysis. I cited Telstar as latest evidence world shrinking and said whatever advantage they had from secrecy wasting asset. K responded it might be true they gave too much attention and importance to secrecy but said on our side our military obsessed with desire acquire ever more information. He said of course every country had spies but sendingU-2 across frontier was essentially act of war. We wanted to know where their rocket bases were but these like anything else could be camouflaged. I said it was natural human trait to fear unknown but pointed out this not to their advantage since it caused our military to prepare to meet threats which might not exist. K said he was more concerned now with use of outer space than with planes but said his own people had shown him photos (not clear whether from planes or satellites but I inferred latter) showing airfield or factories and even planes on field, but not showing what purpose of planes was or what factories produced. Always possible conceal essential information.

With regard to our zonal proposal K said there were only limited number of Soviet rocket bases and we knew where they are. It would therefore be simple for us to arrange to inspect them all. He did not seem convinced by my counter arguments that if disarmament were 30 percent in first stage, only 30 percent of zones could be inspected. He said essence of disarmament problem was that we wanted to take away weapon with which they could hit us while preserving our overseas bases for use against them. I pointed out that in our first stage they would retain 70 percent of their missiles but he said in order know what 30 percent reduction was we would have to know what their total strength was, and pushed aside my argument that this would not involve inspection of all of them.

K began discussion of test ban by asking Sobolev1 whether their announcement of resumption had been published. When answered in affirmative he said they would begin about August 5 or 6—he could not remember exact date. Soviets had resumed testing only because of our actions in military field. He added however somewhat cryptically that he understood Presidentʼs action. He hoped that as result of our experiments we would now be able to conclude test ban, implication being after their next series was completed. I observed there appeared to be hope that as result of our new studies it might be possible to agree not to have permanent observation posts but it would still be necessary to have verification of suspicious events. K brushed this aside saying that we could detect anything from outside and he cited fact that Soviets had conducted unannounced underground test in last series which we had detected and publicized. He said same true of French test which I gathered Soviets had detected. He said test agreement could be reached but he did not think Pentagon wanted it.

From nature of conversation I gathered K had little hope that disarmament agreement can be reached.

He said, for example, that greatest problem was fact that we have many vested interests in arms race and our monopolists would prevent agreement. I replied this was absurd and that what he called monopolists knew as well as anyone else that arms race was dangerous and war would hit them as well as anyone else. I added we had many interesting projects and needs which would require all our resources. It was true sudden disarmament would cause dislocations but we were confident we could deal with them. I expressed opinion military people on both sides responsible for security of country prudently always tended give other side maximum capability and worst intentions but it would be tragic if we let this determine our overall policy, and that arms race was not only vast economic waste but also cause of dangerous tensions.

K said Soviet 7 year plan would be fulfilled whether or not there was disarmament and said plan had been based on assumption there would not be. If disarmament achieved they would probably complete plan by end of five years.

I brought up subject of prevention war by accident or miscalculation saying we had taken many unilateral steps in this field but others called for which required cooperation of both sides and I hoped Soviets would pursue this problem with us. I indicated agreement but did not pursue matter.2

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 600.0012/7-2662. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. On July 24 Thompson cabled that his farewell meeting with Khrushchev was scheduled for 11 a.m. July 25. (Ibid., 123 Thompson) The following day he reported briefly on this private meeting and said that Khrushchev wanted to see him again the next day at his dacha. (Telegram 224 from Moscow; ibid., 611.61/7-2562) In a separate telegram on July 25 Thompson reported that the Chairman had asked whether it would be better for the President to bring the Berlin question to a head before or after the U.S. Congressional elections. (Telegram 225 from Moscow; see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XV, pp. 252-253)

1 Arkady A. Sobolev, Soviet Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs.

2 As Thompson was starting to leave Khrushchev raised the question of Germany and Berlin, saying the conversations between Secretary Rusk and Gromyko seemed to be coming to an end with no result. For Thompsonʼs report on this part of the conversation, see telegram 228 from Moscow, July 26, in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XV, pp. 253-254.





215. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, July 26, 1962, 1 p.m.

229. Khrushchev conversation—miscellaneous. Speaking of his northern trip, K said he had spent much time inspecting fishing industry and remarked they were going to expand their fishing fleet. He said there were lots of fish near our shores and he laughingly remarked that our press devoted lots of attention to their trawlers which were really there for fish. In this connection he said they were considering basing 4 or 5 boats on Cuba if Castro agreed since there were good fishing grounds in this area.

K referred with admiration to our Telstar satellite. In this connection I said he had done much to bring Soviet Union into modern world and Telstar showed how necessary this was. I said impossible for any people to live in isolation in world of today. I therefore thought support both sides had given exchange program very wise. I said there were still many areas of misunderstanding between us and this could only be dispelled by greater knowledge through closer contact. Many of our problems were difficult enough to resolve, but they became more difficult when each side started with different appraisal of facts, and I gave some illustrations of this.

K said in South Vietnam we had stumbled into bog and would be mired down there for long time. People were against Diem who was bad man. He cited article by Chester Bowles which he alleged indicated we were supporting unpopular govt and said he agreed with much of article.1 I said we were convinced it was not South Vietnamese who were making trouble but agents from North Vietnam and that if this intervention stopped and Vietnamese wanted change their govt I felt sure we would not stop them. When K said he had not sent agents in, I said I had not accused him of this but said they came from North Vietnam. He also alleged that our troops had gone into Thailand to bolster up unpopular regime there. He also referred to Iran as country where people would eventually assert themselves. He said Sov Govt was behaving correctly and cited case of Afghanistan. He said their engineers and other personnel had been given strict instructions not even to mention word communism and their relations with that country were excellent. He said King of Afghanistan would pay him visit while he was on holiday.

K said in what was by implication frank admission that it was customary Soviet practice, that they had sent no agitators or agents to US because they knew this waste of time and our govt was secure. He said for same reason Allen Dulles had not sent subversive agents to Soviet Union.

K expressed great satisfaction at settlement Laos problem and said both he and President Kennedy had honestly carried out their promises.

He said they had reestablished good relations with Yugoslavia although they still had disagreements, but history would decide which of two correct. He also used this expression in arguing for coexistence with US. I said he should not deceive himself that we did not have confidence in our system and we were quite prepared to leave verdict to history. I said Communist system had certain advantages but overall we thought ours better. I said important difference between us however was we thought each country should have its own system and this might be any combination of either their or our economic, political or social systems. I said I was aware that dogmatism and revisionism had special meaning in Communist world but said any system which did not adapt itself to changes in world could not survive.

K referred to Congo and said this also was bog and it would take many years for African countries to evolve into real nations.

When I expressed satisfaction at Kohler appointment as my successor and referred to his close relationship with President K said he had met Kohler but did not know him well enough to express any opinion. He would welcome him and endeavor to establish good relations.2

Thompson



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 761.13/7-2662. Secret; Limit Distribution.

1 Presumably Khrushchev is referring to Bowlesʼ address before the National Conference on Economic and Social Development, July 19, which was printed in Department of State Bulletin, August 6, 1962, pp. 207-213.

2 In a final telegram reporting on the conversation, Thompson added that the Chairman asked him to speak to the President about U.S. harassment of Soviet ships. Thompson indicated that he believed the United States was paying too high a price for whatever value it gained from identifying Soviet vessels and pointed out that this was the only time that Khrushchev had raised the issue “with any heart.” (Telegram 230 from Moscow, July 26; Department of State, Central Files, 761.5411/7-2662)





216. Editorial Note


At a July 26, 1962, meeting of the Committee of Principals, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Director Foster stated that recent findings held “some hope for modification of the present U.S. position on a nuclear test ban.” He continued, “the fundamental question is whether, in contrast to continued ‘leapfrogging’ of tests, the national interest is best served by taking advantage of technical improvements in order to propose a treaty that might be more acceptable to the Soviet Union.” Secretary of Defense McNamara “stated that he believed that if we could be certain that the Soviet Union would stop testing, we should do so. Dr. Seaborg had no reservations about this.” Secretary of State Rusk proposed as an alternative that the United States say to the Soviets that “we would like to work on a comprehensive treaty but that we are aware of the Soviet position on on-site inspection,” then tell them that, “for our own part, we want to make a start somewhere, so we propose starting with an atmospheric treaty and making it comprehensive as soon as possible.” For text of the memorandum of conversation, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 499-507.

On August 1 the President met with a small group of advisers to discuss the nuclear test ban issue. According to a memorandum prepared by Director of Central Intelligence McCone, “McCloy and Lovett strongly urged the President not to engage in detailed negotiations until and unless the Soviets change their position on zero on-site inspections and indicated that there existed a climate which would permit negotiation. I strongly supported this recommendation. It was agreed that we should follow this course.” At a larger advisory meeting that followed the same day, the earlier decision was ratified but, according to McConeʼs memorandum, “a difference arose between Arthur Dean and Secretary Rusk, the latter favoring immediate acceptance of an atmospheric ban but Dean maintaining that this should be a holding position and we should exhaust the possibilities of a comprehensive ban before proceeding with a discussion of an atmospheric ban.” For text, see ibid., pages 531-533.

In telegram Todis 469, August 3, the Department of State transmitted its instructions to the U.S. delegation to the disarmament conference in Geneva: “The United States should declare its willingness to discuss a comprehensive test ban treaty involving internationally-supervised national control posts, including some on Soviet soil and involving a possible reduction in the number of on-site inspections.” However, the delegation was to avoid negotiating the precise arrangements for international supervision until the Soviet Union accepted the principle of on-site inspections. “If the Soviet Union continues to indicate unwillingness to accept obligatory on-site inspections on Soviet soil, the United States should be ready to discuss affirmatively an atmospheric-outer space-underwater test ban treaty, possibly around the latter part of August, taking the position that the Soviet refusal to agree to on-site inspection makes it necessary to go to this type of treaty.” For text, see ibid., pages 534-535.





217. Telegram From the Embassy in Denmark to the Department of StateSource


Copenhagen, July 28, 1962, noon.

76. For the Secretary from Ambassador Thompson.1 Reflecting upon my talk with Khrushchev have following conclusions: (1) Am more convinced than ever that he at least does not intend push Berlin question to point of real risk of war. Much will depend, however, upon attitude his colleagues and allies as well as upon how we handle the matter. Believe line taken by President and your representation of our case at Geneva was just right but suggest we must be extremely careful on the one hand to show we are serious in our determination to defend Berlin and on other to avoid engaging their prestige particularly in the military field as they are unbelievably sensitive about this. I think, for example, we should for the present play down any boasts about our military superiority and in Berlin itself avoid any action that could be considered by them as annoyance on our part. At same time we should proceed vigorously with contingency planning which they will know about but without publicity.

I believe Khrushchev is likely to bring Berlin problem before U.N and probably will personally present Soviet case. Suggest we should be thinking about how to prevent neutrals from proposing compromise solutions unacceptable to us and from giving him impression he can proceed with his plans with strong support from world opinion. I have some thoughts on this to put before you upon my return.



(2) Even if we are willing to give up insistence upon having control posts inside Soviet Union I do not think Khrushchev will agree to more than one or two verifications of test ban a year and probably none. He is obsessed with idea we want to locate his missiles but probably more important he wants to conceal his relative weakness.

(3) The mere fact that Khrushchev asserted he could achieve his seven year plan without disarmament convinces me that the opposite is the case but I doubt that we will get anywhere on real disarmament at this time. I got impression, however, that Khrushchev will be prepared seriously to consider steps to prevent war by accident or miscalculation. If we can get over the Berlin hump and then let him know our intelligence capabilities we might make progress on GCD.





Blair



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/7-2862. Secret; Eyes Only.

1 Thompson was en route to Washington.





218. Editorial Note


National Intelligence Estimate 85-2-62, “The Situation and Prospects in Cuba,” issued on August 1, 1962, expressed the view that “by force of circumstances, the USSR is becoming ever more deeply committed to preserve and strengthen the Castro regime.” The estimate noted, however, that the Soviet Union had “avoided any formal commitment to protect and defend the regime in all contingencies.” It repeated the intelligence communityʼs earlier view that Cuban military capabilities were “essentially defensive.” “We believe it unlikely that the Bloc will provide Cuba with the capability to undertake major independent military operations overseas. We also believe it unlikely that the Bloc will station in Cuba Bloc combat units of any description, at least for the period of this estimate.” For text of the estimateʼs conclusions, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume X, pages 893-894.





219. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Agriculture FreemanSource


Washington, August 2, 1962.

Dear Orville: In your letter of July 101 you called my attention to a conversation in which the Soviet Ambassador raised the possibility of an exchange of agricultural delegations on the ministerial level. You may recall my advice in our later telephone conversation that you should be quite friendly and receptive to such an idea.

You will be interested to know that the Agricultural and Cultural Counselors of the Soviet Embassy called at the Department of State on Friday afternoon, July 27,2 and formally proposed an exchange in the field of agricultural information under which the Soviet Minister of Agriculture, K.C. Pysin, would visit the United States in September for four weeks. The Soviet officials further proposed that the delegation total six persons; that the tour include visits to agricultural colleges and experiment stations, and the observation of the extension service and county agent system; and that the group observe general farming, including grain, vegetables and fruit, and visit various agricultural areas, particularly the North Central states.

I hope that you will consider whether you can receive this Soviet delegation and prepare a suitable itinerary for it in the United States. It would also be of interest to know whether you would be prepared to make a similar trip to the Soviet Union at some future time. Members of our staffs have, of course, cooperated closely in the handling of various agricultural exchanges with the Soviet Union. Mr. Frank G. Siscoe, who is in charge of our exchanges with the Soviet Union, will be glad to cooperate with any member of your staff you may designate to handle detailed arrangements.3

With best regards,

Sincerely yours,

Dean4



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/7-1062. No classification marking. Drafted by Siscoe on July 31 and cleared by Ramsey.

1 Not printed. (Ibid.) In another letter to Rusk, July 30, Freeman added that he had talked with Dobrynin again about an agricultural exchange involving the Soviet Minister of Agriculture. Freeman told the Ambassador that the Department of Agriculture would be happy to cooperate in the exchange, subject to overall political determinations. (Ibid., 511.613/7-3062)

2 A memorandum of their conversation with Siscoe is ibid., 511.613/7-2762.

3 On August 3 Freeman replied that the Department of Agriculture would arrange the appropriate scheduling and attempt to dramatize the successes of U.S. agriculture and the Soviet Ministerʼs exposure to it. (Ibid., 033.6111/8-362) In subsequent discussions U.S. and Soviet officials agreed on a 4-week visit by Pysin, beginning September 10. Documentation on the visit is ibid., Central Files 033.6111 and 511.613. For text of the press release, August 25, announcing the visit, see Department of State Bulletin, September 10, 1962, p. 380.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Rusk signed the original.





220. Editorial Note


During a conversation on August 8, 1962, Secretary of State Rusk reminded Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin that the question of creation of a Deputy Foreign Ministers forum to discuss matters relating to Germany and Berlin had been raised with Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko as early as the previous spring. Rusk asked if Dobrynin had received instructions for a response. Dobrynin replied that he would raise the matter with Moscow. On August 13 he met again with Rusk to deliver the following message: “The Soviet Government cannot agree to the proposal for a Deputy Foreign Ministers Conference [on Berlin] since it would give the appearance of negotiations which, in fact, would have no real chance of success. In fact, there has been no progress on resolving the key issue of withdrawing Western forces from West Berlin and terminating the occupation regime there.” Both memoranda of conversation are in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XV, pages 262-266 and 270-271.





221. Editorial Note


The Special Group charged with responsibility for Operation Mongoose (see Document 200) met on August 10, 1962. According to a chronology of Director of Central Intelligence McConeʼs positions concerning Cuba, prepared for him 2# months later, McCone maintained at the meeting that “the Soviets will not let Cuba fail” and that, to prevent such a failure, they would supplement conventional military aid with medium-range ballistic missiles. McCone confirmed that aspect of the discussion in a memorandum for the record he prepared on October 31. For more information, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume X, pages 923-924.

The National Board of Estimates reviewed “The Soviet Stake in Cuba” in a memorandum of August 15, stating: “Cuba could be used by the USSR as a military base from which to threaten the US. With the growth of Soviet strategic capabilities, however, installations on Cuba would add little to the weight of attack which the Soviets could direct against the US. The USSRʼs chief motive for the establishment of, for example, a medium-range missile base on Cuba would therefore be to deter an anticipated US military intervention against Castro. The USSR almost certainly recognizes, however, that such an undertaking would be as likely to provoke as to deter American intervention.” The memorandum continued: “Most important of all, by such an act the Soviets would firmly commit themselves to the military protection of Cuba, a step which they have thus far refrained from taking and which, we believe, they will continue to avoid.” For text, see ibid., pages 941-943.





222. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet UnionSource


Washington, August 20, 1962, 8:17 p.m.

376. Embtel 407.1 Washington Newsweek Bureau feels Bassow expulsion based on at least two other 1962 issues in addition to August 13 jokes. These are Hulda Clark story January 8 and material February 5 issue. Also Department understands that interview with school principal may have been maneuvered despite prior refusal and objections by principal.

Department has advised Newsweek this issue best played low key in order not jeopardize possibility replacement. Department not considering retaliation at this time. Newsweek has indicated both to Department and White House that they also do not wish Department to retaliate for same reasons. Newsweek London correspondent Erwin Goodwin now has valid Soviet visa which issued him as summer replacement for Bassow. Newsweek intends apparently send Goodwin soonest to Moscow in order maintain Bureau representation.

Embassy may at its discretion approach Foreign Ministry on informal basis to request explanation for expulsion. Matter already discussed informally with Soviet Embassy here. As for legality of telegraph office failure notify sender his message not acceptable, Department feels this question not too meaningful since Soviet practices cannot be equated with those followed Western countries.

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 961.6211/8-1862. Confidential. Drafted by Ramsey, cleared by Manning and Guthrie, and approved by Tyler.

1 On August 16 the Embassy in Moscow had reported that Whitman Bassow, a Newsweek correspondent in Moscow, had been expelled from the Soviet Union, an expulsion which was both unexplainable and unexpected. (Telegram 394 from Moscow; ibid., 961.6211/8-1662) In telegram 407, August 18, the Embassy reported that the expulsion appeared to be based on a cable Bassow had attempted to send in connection with the story “What Makes Ivan Laugh?,” which appeared in the August 13 issue of Newsweek. The telegram concluded with the suggestion that, in view of the U.S. interest in increasing the flow of information from the Soviet Union, the Embassy should be authorized to approach the Foreign Ministry at an appropriate level to ask for an explanation of the expulsion. (Ibid., 961.6211/8-1862)





223. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Schlesinger) to Secretary of State RuskSource


Washington, August 20, 1962.

SUBJECT

Luncheon with Ambassador Dobrynin



On August 14, Ambassador Dobrynin asked me for lunch at the Soviet Embassy. Following are the high points of an entirely non-memorable conversation.

1. The Ambassadorʼs chief interest was evidently in American domestic politics. He asked me a number of questions about the prospects of the autumn elections, the strength of conservatism in the Congress, the power of the John Birch Society, etc. In answer I tried to remind him of the ebb and flow of American politics. I told him that phenomena like the John Birch Society were a predictable response to affirmative and purposeful government and said that anyone in the United States in the thirties who had permitted himself to become obsessed with the evidences of surface opposition to Roosevelt would have deceived himself about the main trend of events—that observers must take care not to spend all their time watching the sideshows while the parade marches by outside. He seemed unmoved.

2. We had some talk about the United Nations. He said that he had no information regarding the rumor that Chairman Khrushchev might be coming to New York in September and gave the impression of slight skepticism about it. He said little about Berlin. When I asked him when Ulbricht was likely to return to East Germany, he said that he thought Ulbricht was taking a much-needed holiday in Sochi.

3. He raised the question of the Congo and asked why we let Tshombe get away with his divisive and obstructionist policies. He seemed to believe that, if we really wanted to, we could discipline Tshombe and integrate Katanga tomorrow. I tried to explain that ordering small potentates around might sometimes be harder than it looked and instanced Enver Hoxha.1 I also said that, while the society with which he was most familiar could no doubt pursue any policy it wanted so far as domestic reaction was concerned, societies which believed in free discussion had to take some account of internal opinion, and that this might affect, for example, the policy of Great Britain. The exchange was inconclusive.

4. I then asked him why, if the USSR was so strong and secure, it did not have enough confidence in itself to permit the sale in Moscow kiosks and hotels of western non-Communist newspapers and magazines. He said that it was necessary to forbid the sale of such western publications in Moscow because, if Soviet citizens knew what lies these publications contained, they would be filled with indignation and fury toward the west, and this would make it much harder for the Soviet Government to pursue its policy of peace. He then launched into the question of Soviet anti-semitism. If the Russian people read the stories in the American press about anti-semitism in the Soviet Union, he said, then they would really get mad and the Jews in the Soviet Union would be in genuine danger. When I lightly questioned this line of argument and said that I doubted whether the sale of the London Times or the Manchester Guardian or the New York Times in Moscow could have such a catastrophic impact, especially if the Soviet people were as dedicated to their regime as their leaders insisted, he said that, as a matter of fact, in 1959-60 the Soviet Government had decided to make some adjustments on the import of foreign newspapers and magazines. Then the U-2 incident took place. The consequence, the Ambassador said, was to set back for many years the prospect of permitting the sale of foreign publications in the Soviet Union.

5. The Ambassador reminisced at considerable length about himself and his entry into the Soviet foreign service. He said that 70 percent of Soviet Ambassadors were, like himself, engineers; and that, so far as he knew, only one Soviet Ambassador was a lawyer. In chatting about Soviet diplomats, he said that the present Soviet Ambassador to Brazil speaks neither Spanish nor Portuguese and is rather unhappy.



Arthur Schlesinger, Jr.2



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR, Dobrynin Talks. Confidential. Copies were sent to Bundy, Bohlen, and Tyler.

1 Chairman of the Albanian Communist Party.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.





224. Editorial Note


At a meeting in Secretary of State Ruskʼs office on August 21, 1962, Director of Central Intelligence McCone reported new information available on the accelerated Soviet supply of personnel and materiel to Cuba. McCone indicated that the extent of Soviet supply operations was much greater than had been reported 11 days earlier and that construction work probably included either highly sophisticated electronic installations or missile sites, probably ground-to-air. According to McConeʼs memorandum of the meeting: “There was general agreement that the situation was critical and that the most dynamic action was indicated. There was discussion of various courses of action open to us in case the Soviets place MRBM missiles on Cuban territory. There was also discussion of blockades of Soviet and Bloc shipping into Cuba or alternatively a total blockade of Cuba. Throughout these discussions, it was abundantly clear that in the minds of State, and Mr. Bundy, speaking for the White House, there is a very definite inter-relationship between Cuba and other trouble spots, such as Berlin. It was felt that a blockade of Cuba would automatically bring about a blockade of Berlin.” For text of McConeʼs memorandum, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume X, pages 947-949.

The next day Presidentʼs Special Assistant Schlesinger forwarded to McGeorge Bundy an intelligence memorandum on Soviet military aid to Cuba that concluded that recent military shipments and construction activity, together with recent Soviet bloc economic commitments, amounted “to the most extensive campaign to bolster a non-bloc country ever undertaken by the USSR.” In his covering memorandum, however, Schlesinger stated that “any military construction will probably be defensive in function; a launching pad directed against the U.S. would be too blatant a provocation.” For text, see ibid., pages 950-953.

At a meeting on Cuba with his advisers on August 23, the President raised the question, according to McConeʼs memorandum of the meeting, of “what we could do against Soviet missile sites in Cuba. Could we take them out by air or would a ground offensive be necessary or alternatively could they be destroyed by a substantial guerrilla effort.” The President also “raised question of what we should do in Cuba if Soviets precipitated a Berlin crisis.” After the meeting McCone told Attorney General Robert Kennedy privately that “Cuba was the key to all of Latin America; if Cuba succeeds, we can expect most of Latin America to fall.” In National Security Action Memorandum No. 181, issued later the same day, the President specified eight actions or studies to be “undertaken in the light of evidence of new bloc activity in Cuba.” For text of McConeʼs memorandum and NSAM No. 181, see ibid., pages 953-958.





225. Editorial Note


In April 1962 the United States had informed the North Atlantic Treaty Organizationʼs North Atlantic Council that it would be willing, if the allianceʼs European members wished, to “join its allies in developing a modest sized (on the order of 200 missiles) fully multilateral NATO sea-based MRBM force.” The United States did not “urge a NATO MRBM force on the Alliance, in view of already programmed US strategic forces, but we are prepared to proceed with it in view of the recognized need for greater sharing of nuclear responsibilities within the Alliance and the fact that such force would have military utility.” For text of the Department of Stateʼs instructions to the U.S. Mission to NATO, transmitted in telegram Topol 1579, April 16, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XIII, pages 380-383.

While in Geneva for the disarmament conference and the signing of the Laos Accords, Secretary of State Rusk and Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko had a private dinner, probably on July 22, for which no memorandum of conversation has been found. During the dinner, Rusk and Gromyko discussed nonproliferation of nuclear weapons, and Gromyko apparently raised objection to aNATO multilateral nuclear force as an obstacle to any agreement on nonproliferation. See ibid., volume VII, page 494, footnote 3 thereto, and footnote 6 on page 503 for fragmentary information on the dinner.

On August 8 Rusk called in Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin and, according to the memorandum of conversation, asked that he convey a “personal message” to Gromyko on “non-diffusion” of nuclear weapons: “Your Government apparently wishes to consider multilateral arrangements with respect to nuclear weapons as a part of the central problem of the multiplication of national nuclear forces. I sincerely believe that this point of view rests upon a misunderstanding and that it stands in the way of our acting together on a common interest. From our point of view, we consider the discussion of multilateral arrangements in the West as, among other things, a means for preventing the further spread of nuclear weapons on a national basis.” Rusk stated further that he “had the impression from our conversation in Geneva that it might be possible for us to concentrate on the single issue of national nuclear capability.” Were it “clear on both sides that this is the object and that we are not now trying to deal with the issue of possible multilateral arrangements, it seems to me that we might be able to reach an agreement with respect to the non-transfer of weapons, either directly or indirectly, to additional national forces.” Dobrynin, commenting on “the point in the Secretaryʼs message concerning multilateral arrangements,” said “he thought this was all right—it is not part of the central problem. He asked about Germany, however. The Soviets had three points, not to give Germany atomic weapons directly, indirectly, or through multilateral arrangements.” For text, see ibid., pages 541-547.

On August 23 Dobrynin brought in Gromykoʼs reply to Rusk. According to the memorandum of conversation, “the message from the Foreign Minister noted that the U.S. and U.S.S.R. positions now appear to be quite close as regards the non-transfer problem. It is proposed that an international undertaking be sought involving three points: (1) an obligation on the part of the nuclear powers not to hand over to non-nuclear states nuclear weapons or the technical information necessary for their production; (2) an obligation on the part of non-nuclear states not to produce and not to acquire from other states nuclear weapons, and also not to receive technical information necessary for their production; (3) there should also be excluded the transfer through military alliances to those states which do not possess them i.e., the transfer of such weapons in an indirect manner, irrespective of whether or not the national armed forces of these states are component parts of the armed forces of any military alliance.” Rusk commented that, “as he understood the presentation, the position outlined by Foreign Minister Gromyko would appear to be a constructive and positive step forward.” Rusk continued, “we cannot define now the hypothetical formula [for the multilateral nuclear force] upon which the alliance on our side may agree; however, it should be clear that we would not use an alliance arrangement for the purpose of passing nuclear weapons indirectly to a non-nuclear power.” For text, see ibid., pages 556-557.





226. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, August 24, 1962.

Soviet Foreign Policy Developments

Moscowʼs abolition of the office of the Soviet commandant in Berlin on 22 August was intended to remove the most important remaining symbol of four-power responsibility for all of the city. The timing of this move probably was dictated by renewed Western insistence that the USSR acknowledge its responsibility for East Berlin by participating in a meeting of the four commandants to discuss means of easing tensions produced by the recent incidents at the Berlin Wall. Although the decision to dissolve the commandantʼs office probably does not foreshadow an early breakoff of bilateral talks with the US, it does suggest that Khrushchev sees little chance of obtaining further Western concessions at this time and that he is now mainly concerned with strengthening the USSRʼs position for signing a separate peace treaty with East Germany.

The Soviet communiqué1 announcing the abolition of the commandantʼs office suggests that this will not have any immediate practical effect on Allied military access to West Berlin. Responsibility for “control over the movement of personnel and supplies” of the Western garrisons has been transferred “temporarily” to the commander in chief of the Soviet forces in Germany. The Soviets apparently do not intend to withdraw from the Berlin Air Safety Center (BASC) in the near future, and thus abandon their control over military air access. The failure of the communiqué to refer specifically toBASCʼs future suggests, however, that some move to subject civilian air access to East German control may be in the offing. Moscow may also be prepared to permit the Ulbricht regime to incorporate East Berlin into East Germany and to impose new requirements on Allied military personnel entering East Berlin in an effort to force the West either to recognize GDR sovereignty over East Berlin or to forego further patrol activity there.

The dissolution of the commandantʼs office marked the culmination of a series of maneuvers over the past months to bypass the Western commandants in Berlin and to transfer all remaining four-power relations and functions from the commandants to the level of the commanders of the Soviet and Western forces in Germany. The USSR had rejected a Western proposal of 25 June for a meeting of the four commandants to discuss means of easing tensions in Berlin. The acting Soviet commandant repeated this rejection when the three Western commandants renewed the proposal on 19 August. The Soviet communiqué of 22 August charged that the Western commandants were trying to take advantage of the existence of the Soviet commandantʼs office to interfere in the internal affairs of the “sovereign and independent” GDR and its capital.

In addition to the immediate purpose of blocking Western efforts to oblige the USSR to acknowledge its responsibility for East Berlin, the Soviets probably believe that the abolition of their commandantʼs office will further erode Western rights based on the four-power status of the city and make it more difficult for the West to justify its position that the continued presence of Western forces under existing agreements is not a negotiable question.

The decision to terminate the commandantʼs office has not been accompanied thus far by any efforts to create an atmosphere of imminent crisis. The East German reaction to recent disorders in West Berlin was harsh, featuring charges that “fascist hooligans” and “young political rowdies,” enjoying the protection of Mayor Brandt, had attacked Soviet personnel and terrorized the West Berlin populace. Moscow radio warned on 20 August that tension in Berlin “has now turned into a direct threat of a serious conflict” but concluded that these disorders simply show that a peace treaty must be signed without delay. Moscow added that the USSR “is not closing the door to negotiations on the German and Berlin problems.”

Khrushchev Speech

In his speech at the 18 August Moscow ceremony honoring the two Soviet cosmonauts, Khrushchev repeated the standard formula that a separate treaty will be signed only if “we fail to meet with understanding on the part of the Western powers.”2 He cited both the Laos and West New Guinea settlements as evidence that it should be possible to settle the questions of a German peace treaty, admission of both German states to the UN, and creation of a free-city status for West Berlin. On the question of Western troopsʼ remaining in West Berlin, Khrushchev apparently tried to leave an impression that his position was hardening. He said that the USSR would agree to a temporary presence of troops under UN auspices but would not accept forces of NATO members under the UN flag. He made no reference to his earlier public proposal to replace Western forces with contingents from four smallerNATO and Warsaw Pact states underUN authority.

Despite Khrushchevʼs public rejection of any NATO troops in West Berlin, the Soviets continued to hint privately at flexibility on this issue. A member of the Soviet UN delegation sounded out a US official on 17 August regarding a “UN solution” which would permit US, British, and French forces to remain in West Berlin, supplemented by contingents of Warsaw Pact and other NATO troops, all under the UN flag. Ambassador Dobrynin also mentioned this formula in his 13 August talk with Secretary Rusk.

The Soviet ambassador to Bonn took a cautious line after returning from Moscow, stating on 18 August that there is “no definite date” for signing a separate treaty and that Moscow expects further talks between Rusk and Dobrynin. [13 lines of 2-column source text not declassified]

Possible Initiative on Berlin in UN

There have been further indications that Khrushchev may come to New York next month to place the Berlin and German questions before the UN General Assembly and possibly to create an occasion for a meeting with President Kennedy. Khrushchev reportedly told the West German ambassador on 18 August that he probably would arrive in the second half of September, although his plans were not yet definite. President Kekkonen of Finland told [1 line of 2-column source text not declassified] that his visit to theUSSR has been scheduled from 10 to 17 October, after Khrushchevʼs visit to the UN.

Khrushchevʼs principal purpose in appearing before the UN probably would be to generate additional pressure on the West to be more forthcoming in negotiations for a Berlin settlement. He might envisage this as his final effort to probe for Western concessions before deciding to proceed with a separate peace treaty. Recent Soviet pronouncements suggest that Khrushchev will propose a “compromise” under which the Western “occupation regime” would be replaced by some form of UN role in guaranteeing the independence and security of West Berlin. He may also call for the admission of both German states to the UN and seek UN endorsement of the need for a German peace treaty, portraying this as the prerequisite for progress on disarmament and a general improvement in East-West relations.

The possibility cannot be excluded, however, that Khrushchev has decided to proceed toward a separate peace treaty or invoke other measures to heighten Berlin tensions and believes that taking the issue to the UN would inhibit Western reactions.

Geneva Talks

The USSR rejected on 20 August proposals for a nuclear test ban treaty which would include tests in the atmosphere, outer space, and under water, but not underground explosions. A Soviet spokesman at Geneva said a partial test ban “will not settle the problem” of ending the nuclear armaments race “because the Americans would continue testing weapons underground.” He added that theUSSR remains “dedicated” to the eight neutralist membersʼ “compromise” memorandum as the “sole” basis for a treaty banning all tests.

In a talk with Ambassador Dean on 15 August, Soviet delegate Kuznetsov made it clear that the USSR will not relax its insistence on a test ban based exclusively on national detection systems, with no international supervision or obligatory on-site inspections. He contended that on-site inspection is an entirely political question and that the divergent views of Soviet and US scientists are irrelevant. Kuznetsov hinted, however, that prospects for agreement may improve in the next few years with changed circumstances, including perfection of detection systems which might make the US more willing to forego on-site inspection.

[Here follow sections on Soviet-Iranian relations and the Sino-Indian border.]



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Top Secret; [codeword not declassified]; Noforn. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 1-3 of the Weekly Review section of the issue.

1 For text of the statement issued by the Soviet news agency TASS announcing abolition of the post of Soviet commandant in Berlin, August 22, see Documents on Germany,1944-1985, pp. 823-824.

2 For text of the speech, see the FBIS Daily Report, USSR amp; East Europe, pp. BB8-BB19, August 20, 1962.





227. Editorial Note


On August 27, 1962, the President and Prime Minister Macmillan issued a joint statement announcing submission to the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Conference of “a draft treaty containing proposals for an end to all nuclear testing in all environments as well as an alternative draft treaty providing for an end to nuclear testing in the atmosphere, underwater, and in outer space.” For text of the statement and draft treaties, see Documents on Disarmament, 1962, volume II, pages 791-807.

Chairman Khrushchev responded to the President in an informal communication on September 4: “Let us immediately sign an agreement on the cessation of nuclear tests in the atmosphere, outer space and under water but at the same time let us agree that with regard to underground tests negotiations will go on with an aim to reach an agreement on the underground tests as well.” Khrushchev added: “We proceeded earlier and proceed now from an assumption that under any international agreement on the cessation of nuclear weapons tests France should assume commitments analogous to those of the USSR, the US and Britain.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 561-562.





228. Highlights of Discussion at Secretary of State Ruskʼs Policy Planning MeetingSource


Washington, August 28, 1962.

SUBJECT

“Khrushchev at Bay”



At the Secretaryʼs Planning Meeting on August 28, 1962, Mr. Rostow presented thoughts he had developed regarding where the Soviets currently stand in their prosecution of the cold war. He explained that in the planning process it is desirable on occasion to apply the long view, to look at an existing situation against the backdrop of what has gone before and of alternatives that seem open for the future.

Mr. Rostow saw the post-war Soviet offensive as falling into two distinct phases. The first—Stalinʼs—had been marked by a direct thrust riding on the momentum of the war. In the West it involved the reannexation of the Baltic States and Bessarabia, subjugation of the countries of Eastern Europe, the military threat against Iran and Turkey, the guerrilla campaign in Greece, attempted exploitation of communist strength in the countries of Western Europe, and various moves, including the Berlin Blockade, to achieve Soviet dominance within the whole of Germany. This drive in the West was brought to a halt by the success of the Truman Doctrine, the Marshall Plan, and finally the Berlin airlift. In the East, Stalin capitalized on the communist victory in China, encouraged dangerous guerrilla campaigns in South Korea, Malaya, Indo-China and the Philippines, and finally fostered a direct military attack on South Korea. The thrust in the East was brought to a halt by the decisive defeat of the Chinese Communist armies at the 38th parallel in Korea in April-June, 1951, although guerrilla operations continued in Indo-China.

During Stalinʼs last years an interlude occurred in Soviet active prosecution of the cold war. This continued after Stalinʼs death, his successors seeming uncertain as to how, or perhaps whether, to proceed. Only after Khrushchev firmly established himself in power in 1957 was a systematic new offensive launched.

Inauguration of this second offensive coincided with the tremendous psychological boost given the Soviets by Sputnik I and the presumably parallel advances in military rocketry. Looking back at it, this offensive appears definitely as a “Post-Sputnik Offensive.” The starkest manifestation of the new drive was Khrushchevʼs commitment to do something about Berlin. Elsewhere its main thrust was directed toward the underdeveloped countries and included renewed guerrilla warfare in Laos and South Viet-Nam, attempted exploitation of turbulence and confusion in the Congo, efforts to capitalize on the windfall victory in Cuba, and serious—and costly—engagement of the United States in the trade and aid field. The Soviets gave every evidence of being genuinely confident over their prospects in this offensive. They seemed really to believe that they were riding an irresistible wave of history.

Today this second offensive is in disarray. Efforts in the Congo have been checkmated; Berlin had yielded no easy dividends; Cuba has proved less of a springboard than a trough draining Soviet resources. Meanwhile, and completely contrary to doctrinal concepts, the economic progress and growing unity of Western Europe have reached a stage where they can no longer be written off as artificial developments dependent on the US. Within the communist world itself a strong backwash of the wave of history has set in. The Chinese Communists have failed dismally in their program to transform China. The ChiCom revolt against Moscowʼs authority has rent the monolithic character of the socialist camp and has diluted Soviet control of the world communist movement as a whole. The Soviet Union and the European satellites show unmistakable signs of resources strains. Khrushchev has had to preside over the liquidation or indefinite postponement of internal goals to which he was personally strongly committed. Worldwide, the communist image stands tarnished and few appear overly impressed by the irresistibleness of the communist cause.

Viewed in the perspective furnished by the foregoing, Mr. Rostow said, the present situation leads to two general conclusions: First, we have reason for real hope. Assuming continued alertness and required performance on our part, we have it in our grasp to frustrate Soviet aims in regard to world communism and perhaps to achieve a set of inter-state relationships that will conform more nearly to our long term security interests.

Second, before things get better they may get worse. We must view the present and immediate future as a time of special danger. Khrushchev may seek to break out of his frustrations. Three areas appear to merit special watchfulness: —The arms race: Khrushchev may stake heavily on an important breakthrough that would furnish a hard military base for a renewed offensive.

—Berlin: Khrushchev may feel under strong compulsion to achieve at least one success to which he can point, and may be prepared to step up the risk rate over Berlin.

—Cuba: Khrushchev may be unwilling to accept as final the failure of Cuba to produce automatic gains in Latin America and may decide to increase substantially Soviet outlays and risks to secure a payoff from Cuba.





Mr. Rostow called attention to an exchange of memoranda between INR and S/P1 on the thesis he had presented and noted that despite certain divergencies both papers underscored an evident trend on Moscowʼs part to reduce commitments to world communism in favor of Russian state interests. This trend, if it should continue, would be of central importance. We should watch it with care.

There appeared to be general agreement within the group that the Soviets may have to undertake reappraisal of their policies. It was noted that when Khrushchev started his special drive, he committed himself to “peaceful coexistence” as the best means of getting on with world revolution. If he is dissatisfied with the results, as the morningʼs presentation would indicate, he faces the necessity of choosing between hard alternatives. He may have to decide whether to elevate doctrine to “pure doctrine” and concentrate on Soviet interests as state interests, or to thrust forward again with stops out.

Several aspects of current Soviet conduct were seen as suggestive in this connection. Why is Moscow restraining Red China in Southeast Asia? On the basis of an objective appraisal, Khrushchev might well conclude that the communists could afford to take greater risks there and reap worthwhile dividends. It might be, of course, that irrespective of surface appearances he does not feel sure of the US, of what the US would actually do in a pinch, and hence sees less opportunity than one might suppose. But other factors—factors related to Soviet state interests—could be at play.

The latest Soviet position on the nuclear diffusion problem was also thought to be of significance. For the first time, the Soviets had moved away from concentration on Germany. They proposed a simple one-two approach that would affect all nations equally: We agree with each other not to share nuclear weapons with anybody; then we agree to try to persuade others not to receive or to make nuclear weapons. This is very interesting from the standpoint of Soviet relations with China. Are the Soviets prepared to take on China on this issue? It may be that they are attempting a gimmick, that they calculate that after Peiping refuses to be bound they can induce the US to go ahead and force West German agreement. On the other hand, they may be reflecting old-fashioned state interests. They have a nuclear capability and we have a nuclear capability. Perhaps they have decided that it is to their national interest that no one else have it and are prepared to act accordingly.

Several in the group thought the Soviets because of strictly state interests are indeed concerned to forestall an independent ChiCom nuclear capability. An agreement with us would make it easier for Moscow to refuse any aid to China in the nuclear weapons field. Moscow might have in mind forcing a multilateral military arrangement on China, under which the Soviets would actually retain all nuclear capability in their own hands. The reason that Moscow has chosen this particular time to move may be that, contrary to our own current estimates, they see the Chinese as close to detonating a device. They may feel under some urgency to head off the Chinese.

Others doubted that Moscow could realistically hope that China can be headed off by any Soviet maneuver. Almost certainly Peiping poses to Moscow a de Gaulle problem magnified many times. Moreover, the Chinese Communists have already shown that they have no intention of permitting Soviet-controlled forces on their territory. It is also questionable that Moscow needs an excuse to refuse aid to Chinaʼs nuclear development program. They evidently have been refusing such aid all along.

With respect to the question of Soviet restraints on China in Southeast Asia, it was suggested that Moscow is concerned that Peiping not be given an opportunity to control Soviet foreign policy. The Soviets have a publicized commitment to back China in difficulties involving the US. They almost certainly at this stage do not wish to get into a situation that would require them to honor those commitments. However, their prestige is involved in the commitments and they doubtless wish to avoid the necessity of openly reneging on them. Hence the best policy is to keep China quiet. Also, Moscow hardly has great interest in any aggrandizement of Chinese power and influence in Southeast Asia or anywhere else at this time. After all, two cold wars are currently under way.

Reverting to the overall situation existing at present, the point was made that the altered Soviet outlook underscored the desirability of a US policy that concentrates on getting on with our own job. The best way to deal with the communists is to take initiatives related to putting the free worldʼs own house in order. The problem for us is to determine and to make the most of initiatives that are open to us. Important possibilities already exist in connection with the development of the European and Atlantic community, the Alliance for Progress, and augmenting western influence in the UN. We should search for other areas, ones wherein it will not be necessary to secure Soviet agreement.

An exercise that might be instructive and helpful would be to run over the postwar period and to make a check list of critical decisions that were or were not made that had a bearing on our capability for initiatives, for our capability to keep control over events. Certain decisions that had had a significant negative effect readily came to mind: —The decision to demobilize after the war. This served to tie our hands at a critical time. For example it forced the decision not to take action in China in 1946-47. Six or seven US divisions in China might have made the difference, but we simply did not have the divisions.

—The withdrawal of the last US combat unit from Korea in 1949. This may have been the decisive step that triggered the Soviet decision for the invasion of South Korea.

—The failure to take direct action in North Viet-Nam in 1952. The Red River Valley had been long looked upon as the key to all Indo-China and even Southeast Asia. Yet we failed to take the military steps necessary to tip the scales.





There are others of similar import—other instances of critically important negative decisions, positive decisions, and decisions by failure to take decision. It would be fruitful, it was thought, to review these.

As a caveat in regard to initiatives, the suggestion was made that we concentrate on operations that do not require acceptance of our own ideas, institutions, and practices by others. The Soviet failures that had been noted in the morningʼs discussion related in almost every instance to efforts on the part of Moscow to impose something alien on one or another people. Castroʼs influence in Latin America had waned, for example, because he represented an alien force. The Latin Americans do not want to be dominated by anybody but themselves.

A specific initiative proposed was that we see the contest in South Viet-Nam through to a fully successful conclusion. The stakes involved in South Viet-Nam are much larger than South Viet-Nam itself. At issue there is whether communist sponsored insurgency in the guise of a war of liberation can pay off. This is a matter of great doctrinal importance to the communists and one that looms large in the Sino-Soviet dispute. If we can thoroughly disabuse those who see indirect aggression as a plausible way, we will have scored heavily.

Achievement of a more rapid US rate of growth was viewed as another area where we have a real job to do. The relative lag of the past several years must have encouraged the communists. It doubtless contributed to the optimism that underlay the Khrushchev offensive. In the present situation it is doubly important that we push forward.

The Kremlin was seen as also probably searching for “new initiatives”. This would be particularly true if they read the balance sheet as it is being read here. For this reason, it would perhaps be better for us if Moscow remained more optimistic than we feel they should be.

What we should hope for, it was suggested, is that the Soviets will seek compensation in activities and accomplishments related to the enhancement of Russian national prestige. It would be to our interest if they had a golden bridge to a retreat along this particular road. With this in mind, such successes as the recent spectacular in space might in the long run not be too bad.

We should give thought to moves on our part that might contribute to a rechanneling of Soviet energies and ambitions into national pride and prestige areas. We need, perhaps, a “Department of Weird Ideas” that would have as its task uninhibitedly exploring the whole range of possibilities lying before us. Challenges in the battle against nature might lend themselves to this. As an example, we might seize upon general concern over bacteriological warfare, and propose to the Russians a two-fold attack: one, a declaration against the use of bacteriological weapons; and two, a pooling of our respective knowledge of esoteric bacteria and germs to advance world capability in the health field. Some years back when a new strain of the black plague virus was brought into India by birds from the Soviet Union and was producing alarming results, the Russians cooperated with the Indians and with us to lick the problem. They did this quietly and without attempting to make propaganda gains. A number of means may be open to us to encourage and capitalize on a “Russian spirit”, as against a “Communist spirit”.

In this connection, it was noted that we should keep in mind that there will be, before too long, a post-Khrushchev period in the Soviet Union. The climate then may be quite different. We should lay as extensive a foundation as possible for utilizing any opportunities that may then arise.

It was generally agreed that it is indeed important that we give thought to the “post-Khrushchev” problem. We should also look at post-situations around the world, wherever there is a dominant figure in control and particularly where means for an orderly succession are lacking.

Action Requirements:

In the course of the discussion, the following specific undertakings were suggested: 1. An evaluation of the implications of the Soviet response on non-diffusion. (INR with EUR)

2. A check list of critical US decisions during the post-war period that affected our “initiative” capability. (INR)

3. Development of proposals for broad US initiatives that would not require Soviet agreement but would affect relative prospects of the two sides in the cold war. (General with S/P coordination)

4. Exploration of possible US moves designed to channel Soviet energies and activities away from world communist aspirations and into building Soviet national pride and prestige. (S/P)

5. Examination of the implications for US policy of the post-Khrushchev problem in the USSR. (Underway as part ofBNSP “Task Assignments.”)

6. Check list of significant “post” problems in other parts of the world and examination of implications for US policy. (INR and S/P)





* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text, but it is dated August 31. The meeting was held at 10 a.m. and was attended by Rusk. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Books)

1 For the meeting Rostow had circulated copies of his speech at the National War College on August 20 ( Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR); an August 21 INR memorandum entitled “Khrushchev at Bay, in the Light of NIE 11-9” (ibid.); and an August 23 S/P memorandum to INR commenting on the INR memorandum. (Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, USSR) NIE 11-9-62 is printed as Document 187.





229. Editorial Note


On July 23, 1962, Secretary of State Rusk signed for the United States the Declaration on the Neutrality of Laos agreed upon at the International Conference on the Settlement of the Laotian Question in Geneva. Attached to the Declaration was a 20-article Protocol. The texts of the Declaration and Protocol are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pages 1075-1083.

In a memorandum to Assistant Secretary of State Harriman, August 28, Roger Hilsman, Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, argued that the tactics being followed by Pathet Lao/Viet Minh forces were nevertheless “consistent with an intention to prevent the formation of a true government of national union in effective control of all Laos.” Hilsman continued, “the evidence so far available does not indicate that the Communists and in particular Moscow are ready to abandon the entire coalition principle. The pattern of past Communist negotiations at Panmunjom, Warsaw, Berlin, and elsewhere is to confront the West with prolonged intransigence and obstructionism in the hope of eroding resistance and winning cheap gains without provoking an unacceptable military response. When convinced that such a response may be in the offing or that public rupture of an agreement carries intolerable political costs, the Communists usually compromise their position so as to avoid either consequence.” The memorandum was forwarded to President Kennedy on August 28 by Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs Kaysen. For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XXIV, pages 889-893.





230. Editorial Note


Photographs obtained from a U-2 reconnaissance mission flown over Cuba on August 29, 1962, revealed that surface-to-air missile sites were under construction on the island. Deputy Director of Central Intelligence Marshall Carter conveyed the information on August 31 to McGeorge Bundy at the White House. For further information, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume X, page 968.

In a memorandum to the President, August 31, Bundy stated that “we have two problems here which should be kept separate. The first is our reaction to the current step, and the second is our preparations to react against something which would require or make possible a major military operation against Cuba. The present actions in Cuba do not justify such action.” Accompanying the memorandum was Bundyʼs analysis of the probable impact of the introduction of Soviet missiles into Cuba. He argued that surface-to-air missiles would “substantially increase Communist defensive capabilities there” but would not “carry any increased direct threat to the safety of the U.S. mainland.” Surface-to-surface missiles with nuclear warheads, on the other hand, “would constitute a very significant military threat to the continental U.S.,” and “it appears probable that on military grounds alone, the establishment of such a capability would be unacceptable.” For text, see ibid., pages 1002-1006.

In a memorandum to Secretary of State Rusk, September 1, Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research Hilsman concluded, among other things, that “current Soviet moves in Cuba do not appear to be synchronized with Soviet moves in Berlin, but they have a common root in Moscowʼs growing sense of power, and Moscow may hope that increased tensions in one area will lead to Western concessions in the other.” In a memorandum to the President, September 3, Walt Rostow, Counselor of the Department of State, called the Soviet military deliveries “a testing thrust by Moscow” which “places before us the question of where and how we should draw the line with respect to unacceptable action and behavior by the Communists in Cuba and the Hemisphere.” For texts of both memoranda, see ibid., pages 1014-1022 and 1025-1032.

On September 4 the White House released a statement by President Kennedy in which he noted the presence of antiaircraft defensive missiles in Cuba. Kennedy added, however, that there was no evidence of organized Soviet combat forces in Cuba, nor of military bases provided to the Soviet Union, nor of the presence of weapons with an offensive capability, such as ground-to-ground missiles. “Were it to be otherwise, the gravest issues would arise.” For text, see Department of State Bulletin, September 24, 1962, page 450.





231. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet UnionSource


Washington, September 5, 1962, 7:52 p.m.

539. For Udall from Bundy. President has seen Moscowʼs 5871 and asks that you be particularly cautious in responding to any remarks by Khrushchev outside range of your Cabinet responsibilities and cultural interests. A number of the international political questions Khrushchev might raise are now at very sensitive stage, and President believes we should avoid risk of misunderstanding in any comment you might make in view of your standing as Member of Cabinet and leading New Frontiersman.

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100-UD/9-562. Confidential; Niact; Eyes Only. Drafted by Bundy.

1 Telegram 587, September 5, reported that Khrushchev would receive Udall the following day and asked for any guidance that might be appropriate. (Ibid.) Udall visited the Soviet Union for 11 days beginning August 29 primarily to see hydroelectric projects.





232. Editorial Note


On September 6, 1962, the Presidentʼs Special Counsel, Theodore Sorensen, met with Ambassador Dobrynin at the latterʼs request. The Soviet Ambassador informed Sorensen that, as a result of their previous meeting on August 23, which he had reported to Moscow, he had received a personal message from Chairman Khrushchev directing him to inform Sorensen that he would not attend the opening of the United Nations General Assembly and that “nothing will be undertaken before the American Congressional elections that could complicate the international situation or aggravate the tension in the relations between our two countries. We shall follow this course, provided there are no actions taken on the other side which would change the situation. This includes a German peace settlement and West Berlin.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume X, pages 1045-1047.





233. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Ambassador- designate to the Soviet Union (Kohler)Source


Washington, September 6, 1962.

There are four points on which the President wishes to give Ambassador Kohler personal guidance for his use in his first conversation with Chairman Khrushchev: (1) With respect to the recent exchange of notes on the possible inadvertent violation of Soviet frontiers by a U.S. patrol plane,1 the President has particularly asked Ambassador Kohler to reiterate that his instructions of January 1961 are firm and will be most strictly enforced. Continuing investigation indicates that safeguarding procedures in the case of this particular patrol flight were not adequate, and corrective measures are being taken.

(2) The President would like to make clear to Chairman Khrushchev that he has given personal examination to the question of possible interference by United States aircraft and ships with the freedom of movement and navigation of Soviet vessels in international waters. On hearing of Ambassador Thompsonʼs report of the Chairmanʼs expression,2 the President instituted immediate inquiries, and as a result he can give definite assurance that there have not been any encounters since the Presidentʼs inauguration which have had as their motivation the hindrance of movement or navigation in international waters of Soviet vessels. In particular, we know of no instance in which any Soviet ship was ordered to stop or be fired on by a U.S. naval vessel. It is always possible that a particular military officer may act with imperfect judgment, but instructions to all such officers are clear and have been reiterated. If the Chairman knows of specific instances which raise specific questions, the President will be glad to have them investigated if pertinent data are presented.

(3) If Chairman Khrushchev should again raise the question of any possible relationship between events in Berlin and political divisions in the United States, Ambassador Kohler should inform the Chairman that the answer which Mr. Thompson made at the time represents the official opinion of this Government. Any crisis precipitated by Soviet action over Berlin, at any time, would unite public opinion in the United States. The result of such a crisis would inevitably be a worsening of relations between the Soviet Union and the United States, which would not be in the interest of either country. On the other hand, a settlement of this problem and the achievement of a modus vivendi which would reduce tension in Berlin would be to the interest of both governments.

(4) The President continues to regard an effective nuclear test ban as a matter of the greatest importance, and would like Ambassador Kohler to emphasize these two basic points: first, there is simply no way in which the President can bring the United States Senate to agreement on a comprehensive treaty without inspection; second, as the President sees it, the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. have three great common interests in a workable agreement: (a) the fallout problem

(b) the hazard of high energy electrons contaminating outer space

(c) and, perhaps most important of all, the common interest in discouraging other powers from acquiring nuclear weapons.





* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR, Khrushchev Talks (Kohler). Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text.

1 See footnote 2, Document 236.

2 See footnote 2, Document 215.





234. Editorial Note


During the first 3 weeks of September 1962, Director of Central Intelligence McCone, who was on a honeymoon holiday in Europe, received daily briefing cables on the situation in Cuba from Deputy Director Marshall Carter. McCone concluded that the development of a costly surface-to-air defense system in Cuba could only be explained if it was designed to mask and protect the introduction of medium-range ballistic missiles. In a series of cables to Carter, McCone pressed his concerns and supported an expanded program of reconnaissance flights over Cuba. Return cables from Carter indicated that CIA analysts had considered McConeʼs concerns but concluded that the Soviet Union would not run the risk of provoking military reaction from the United States. In Special National Intelligence Estimate 85-3-62, September 19, the conclusions of which were cabled to McCone the same day, the intelligence community stated that a decision to introduce medium- and intermediate-range ballistic missiles into Cuba “would indicate a far greater willingness to increase the level of risk in US-Soviet relations than the USSR has displayed thus far.” The next day, in his final cable in the series, McCone responded that “an offensive Soviet base in Cuba will provide Soviets with most important and effective trading position in connection with all other critical areas and hence they might take unexpected risks to establish such a position.” A report of the arrival of Soviet MRBMs in Cuba, subsequently accepted as the first definitive such report, was received on September 21. For more information and the text of SNIE 85-3-62, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume X, pages 1052-1053, 1070-1080, and 1083-1084.





235. Special National Intelligence EstimateSource


Washington, September 13, 1962.

SNIE 11-15-62

CURRENT SOVIET TACTICS ON BERLIN

Conclusion

The Soviets have declared a “pause” in the negotiations over Berlin, thus marking the end of a phase which began with the Rusk-Gromyko talks last fall. At the same time, they appear to have ruled out a separate treaty in the next few months, and indicated that they envisage an eventual resumption of negotiations. However, it is likely that Khrushchev will continue to make various unilateral moves in order to accomplish piecemeal and de facto some of the changes which would flow from a peace treaty.

Discussion

1. The Soviet pronouncement of 11 September1 confirms the end of a phase in negotiations on the Berlin problem which began with the Rusk-Gromyko meetings in the fall of 1961. In acknowledging that these talks have failed the Soviets did not renounce further negotiations; they apparently envisage a renewal of contacts with the US later this fall. For the time being, however, the Soviets have almost certainly concluded that continuation of negotiations in the manner of the last year holds little promise of success. At the same time, the Soviets have not chosen, as they previously threatened, to proceed immediately to a separate treaty. The statement of 11 September appears to rule out a separate treaty in the next few months. It is probable that their appraisal of the situation at this time, perhaps associated with the increase of tensions over Cuba, has led the Soviets to conclude once again that a separate treaty which poses a direct challenge to the Western presence in and access to Berlin is too hazardous a course.

2. The deferral of a peace treaty, however, need not inhibit the Soviets from taking further action locally to advance their objectives. They have already taken one such step in abolishing their commandantʼs office in Berlin and replacing it with an East German authority. This step not only does away with one of the most important symbols of Four-Power responsibility for the whole of Berlin, but it also opens up a variety of possibilities for further encroachments, of which two seem especially significant.

Local Actions

3. First, a logical next step would be for the East German commandant to impose new conditions on Allied access to East Berlin, claiming that the Soviet departure had altered the basis of entry rights. The Soviets almost certainly believe that they can pose this question in a way which will not provoke the Allies to use force to maintain access. Thus, this move would be designed to force the Allies either to acknowledge East German sovereignty in some fashion, an important victory in itself, or to give up the right of access to the eastern half of the city.

4. The Soviets would closely observe the outcome of this maneuver in order to judge how far they could safely go in involving East Germany in controls on allied access to West Berlin. For example, if the West acquiesced in new documentary procedures at the sector border, or accepted East German escorts for its trips into East Berlin, the Soviets would be encouraged to believe that similar measures on the autobahn would not be very risky. They might conclude that they could begin to involve East German authorities in Soviet controls over access to West Berlin even before a treaty.

5. Second, the Soviets already are taking steps which seem designed to create de facto what they have long demanded of the Allies, namely, a new status for West Berlin alone, guaranteed by Soviet as well as Western forces, to replace the occupation arrangements. They evidently intend to maintain and even intensify their activities in West Berlin and have threatened to retaliate against Allied ground access to the city if the West interferes with or denies Soviet access to West Berlin. They probably expect that, since the West wishes the Soviets to remain in the Berlin Air Safety Center, they can alter the access procedures to and within the city without being thrown out of West Berlin. And if the West does take such action, the Soviets have laid the groundwork for retaliating on the autobahn. To the degree that the Soviets are successful in maintaining their presence in West Berlin, while transferring to East Germany their responsibilities in East Berlin, they will have made a major advance.

6. This is a potent maneuver, not only because it advances Soviet objectives vis-à-vis the Western Powers, but because it also has an important effect on Berlin morale. West Berliners are especially sensitive to any suspicion that the USSR is acquiring a voice in their part of the city. The Soviets realize, of course, that a high state of Berlin morale is a vital ingredient in the Western position and the economic viability of the city.

General Soviet Tactics

7. For the next few months the Soviets are keeping open a number of possibilities including further negotiations, a UN debate, a Khrushchev meeting with President Kennedy, and unilateral encroachments in West Berlin. All this suggests that they are still probing, still assessing Western positions and reactions, and not firmly committed to any fixed course. However, we think it likely that Khrushchev will continue to make various unilateral moves in order to accomplish piecemeal and de facto some of the changes which would flow from a separate treaty. In this tactical prescription, the signing of a peace treaty might come at the end of the process and merely formalize it, or it might come at some intermediate point but in a manner which would not pose a major showdown. As we have previously estimated, the Soviets will hold open the possibility of negotiation at all stages. However, unless they conclude at some point that the West has become willing to entertain significant concessions, their own stated willingness for negotiations or participation in further talks probably will be largely pro forma and will not reflect any serious expectation that some sort of mutually tolerable compromise could be achieved in this way.

The UN

8. The Soviets have recently encouraged rumors that they will raise the Berlin issue this fall at the General Assembly. If they do so, it seems certain that they will not simply turn the entire question over to theUN for whatever solution it can devise. Instead, they will be seeking certain political results, and the manner in which they present the issue will depend upon their objectives.

9. If the Soviets are primarily interested in further negotiations, they would use the UN mainly as a means of generating wider pressures among the neutrals for Western concessions. In addition to arguing the merits of their case, they would probably urge theUN to take some role in Berlin along the lines of various Soviet proposals for an end to the occupation status. They would almost certainly anticipate that such a UN debate would prompt neutrals to urge a meeting between Khrushchev and President Kennedy and a temporary maintenance of the status quo while the parties negotiated. If the Soviets proceed in this general manner, therefore, we would conclude that they were prepared to delay a treaty for a longer time and to continue negotiations, possibly under some UN mandate.

10. If, however, the Soviets intend to rely principally on additional unilateral measures, and perhaps ultimately sign a separate treaty, then any resort to the UN would be intended mainly to inhibit the West from sharp and possibly dangerous reactions. In this case, they would probably make some definite moves toward a treaty before raising the question in the General Assembly. By proceeding in this fashion, they would hope to focus debate on the “threat to peace” represented by Western insistence that the Allies would tolerate no diminution of their rights.



* * *



* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Intelligence Estimates, 11-62, USSR. Secret. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, Army, Navy, and Air Force participated in the preparation of the estimate, which was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by all the members of the USIB except theAEC representative and Assistant Director of the FBI who abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

1 For text, see Pravda or Izvestia, September 12, 1962.





236. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, September 7, 1962, 8 p.m.

616. For President and Secretary from Udall. Policy. Met with Khrushchev yesterday at Pitsunda for two hours followed by lunch and informal conversation.1 First hour was very profitable discussion of electric power and resource development problems.

Khrushchev then introduced West Berlin and other foreign policy issues. As expected, he reasserted his hard line and indicated the Peace Treaty will be signed. He stated flatly he would not allow Western troops remain Berlin and while permitting access for civilian traffic would not allow access for military purposes. However, he did make one significant suggestion which Chargé dʼAffaires feels I should convey to you in person.

Khrushchev expressed his satisfaction with our handling of his U-2 flight protest.2 He seemed even willing to give us the benefit of the doubt and concede such things might even happen accidentally. Obviously your pledge has considerable significance in his thinking.

Stated he had been reading statements of Senators who wanted US to invade Cuba and denounced them in strong terms but is fully aware of position which you have taken and expressed approval of it.

He also expressed strong satisfaction with solution reached in Laos.

As per your counsel, I listened and advanced established positions which our government has taken on issues discussed.

On two occasions, Khrushchev indicated his desire to have you and Mrs. Kennedy as guests at this resort. Of course, he did not express this as an invitation but by implication something which he was most anxious to accomplish and at the appropriate time.

Expect to be in my office on Monday morning and will be available for conference with you and/or Secretary Rusk.

McSweeney



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100-UD/9-762. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

1 A transcript of the conversation, drafted by Udall and his interpreter, is ibid., Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. An extract on Germany and Berlin is printed in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XV, pp. 308-310.

2 On September 4 McSweeney had been called to the Foreign Ministry to receive a note protesting a U-2 violation of Soviet air space East of Sakhalin. In its reply, transmitted to the Embassy in Moscow the same day, the United States allowed that a U.S. Air Force plane, which had encountered severe winds in that area, might have overflown Sakhalin. The note stressed that, if the plane had violated Soviet air space, it was unintentional and that the policy enunciated by the President on January 25, 1961, onU-2 flights had not changed. The texts of the two notes and McSweeneyʼs account of the meeting at the Foreign Ministry are in Department of State, Central Files, 761.5411/9-462. The notes are also printed in Department of State Bulletin, September 24, 1962, pp. 449-450.





237. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, September 13, 1962.

SUBJECT

Discussion of Udall visit toUSSR



PARTICIPANTS

Stewart L. Udall, Ambassador Anatoli Dobrynin, Mrs. Dobrynin, Curtis Kamman



Ambassador and Mrs. Dobrynin invited today Secretary and Mrs. Udall to lunch at the Embassy to share the Secretaryʼs impressions of his trip to the Soviet Union. Mrs. Udall was unable to attend; the Secretary therefore asked that the reporting officer accompany him. Current international political issues were not discussed.

Ambassador Dobrynin showed the Secretary a copy of Pravda containing new verses by Robert Frost.1 Both expressed the opinion that the Frost visit had been an outstanding success. Dobrynin mentioned that no American literary figure of Frostʼs standing had ever visited the Soviet Union before. The Secretary stated that he appreciated the opportunity of visiting with Khrushchev2 and was especially grateful that Khrushchev had received Frost. He stated that he would do his utmost to provide an opportunity for Soviet poet Tvardovsky to see the President when Tvardovsky pays a reciprocal visit in October.

The gift of Georgian wine sent by Khrushchev to the President was mentioned by Dobrynin. The Secretary told of the circumstances which gave rise to the gift—wine tasting and toasting the health of the President at Khrushchevʼs Black Sea villa.

Dobrynin had not yet received a record of the Udall-Khrushchev conversation. He inquired whether Vinogradov had taken notes, and upon learning that he had, asked whether the Secretary had felt the conversation to be significant. The Secretary replied that the conversation had indeed been significant, and at Dobryninʼs request outlined in two or three sentences Khrushchevʼs comments on the U-2 incident in the Far East and on the Berlin question.

The Secretary told Dobrynin of his conviction that exchanges at the very highest level, up to and including chief of state, were an important contribution to better understanding between USSR and USA. Dobrynin stated that an exchange of visits between President Kennedy and Khrushchev would mark the high point of his term as Ambassador in Washington, and that he hoped such an exchange would come to pass when the proper time arrived. He was equally receptive, in a general way, to the suggestion that Vice-President Johnson and Frol Kozlov each pay extensive visits to USSR and USA, respectively.

The Secretary mentioned to Dobrynin that the recent primary elections seemed to indicate that responsible men were gaining support at the expense of men with outmoded political views, and that he would soon be traveling throughout the nation campaigning for congressional candidates who favor President Kennedyʼs policies.

Other conversation revolved around places visited in the Soviet Union, personalities encountered along the way, and opinions on both Russian and American literature.

Dobrynin mentioned that he planned to attend the opening session of the U.N. General Assembly. He gave no indication who might be coming from Moscow.

Dobrynin also expressed the hope that Secretary of Agriculture Freeman would be able to visit the Soviet Union within the next year or so. He had talked with Secretary Freeman in connection with the visit of Soviet Minister of Agriculture Pysin.3



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100-UD/9-1362. Confidential. Drafted by Kamman.

1 Robert Frost visited the Soviet Union August 29-September 9. For an account of his trip, including an extensive summary of his conversation with Khrushchev on September 7, see Reeve, Robert Frost in Russia.

2 See Document 236.

3 See footnotes 1 and 3, Document 219.





238. Memorandum From Secretary of the Interior Udall to President KennedySource


Washington, September 14, 1962.

Repeatedly during my Soviet Union trip I found myself asking this question: What can the United States do to encourage and accelerate those changes in the Soviet system favorable to our own long-term objectives?





Some observers undoubtedly tend to overstate the liberalization that is occurring, but nevertheless there is a consensus that significant changes have taken place in the post-Stalin period. (Perhaps the best recent summary is the Edward Crankshaw article which appeared in the London Observer September 9.)

Some of my own tentative conclusions after eleven days in the Soviet Union were these: 1. There is an unmistakable and deep-seated respect for American power and American prowess. This means that at all levels the Soviet people are inordinately curious about the American way of getting things done. This is a very healthy condition.

2. A pattern of economic incentives and awards is developing in the Soviet Union which, in the long run, might also significantly alter the Soviet system. Some of the more interesting things which we observed (although caveats apply to each) were: a. double-pay wages for the dam-builders on the Siberian frontier;

b. ten-year loans for private homes at Bratsk;

c. the growing attachment of the managers and the elite to what one might call dacha-living.





3. There is evidence of a growing awareness by the Soviets that their ability to compete is inhibited by the secrecy and suspicion which dominate their thinking. The experience of the Soviets with their exchange programs—and the activities of the vital State Committee for the Coordination of Scientific Research Work—has apparently convinced them that a limited “open-window” policy is beneficial to their own system. It is predictable that this window will be opened wider as time passes.

4. The Communist Party apparatus will, of course, remain dominant, but much important decision-making power is gravitating towards the scientists, engineers and managers who are the doers who make their system go and also have strong Party ties. For the most part, these are pragmatic men who are far more interested in building their country than in pursuing Marxian theories of revolution. A form of agnosticism, one might say, is showing up.





Therefore, it is my feeling that we have an opportunity to influence this process of liberalization, and I strongly recommend that a fresh study be made of this whole problem to determine what new courses of action might be pursued with profit.

As a starter, it seems to me we are missing a bet in not arranging more high-level exchanges. Visits to the Soviet Union by the Vice President, the Attorney General and selected members of the Cabinet would be very worthwhile. Return visits by men in high places—Kozlov, for example—would be equally effective.

Stewart L. Udall



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR, Khrushchev/Udall. No classification marking. A copy was sent to Rusk.





239. Editorial Note


In a letter of September 15, 1962, President Kennedy informed Chairman Khrushchev that he was “happy to note your suggestion that you are prepared to negotiate a treaty banning nuclear tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water in the immediate future. Now that the subcommittee on nuclear test ban is continuing in session throughout the recess in the 18-Nation Disarmament Conference, I think we should make a serious effort to work out such an agreement in time to meet the target date of January 1, 1963.” Kennedy added that the U.S. had prepared such a treaty. For text of Kennedyʼs letter, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 568-569.

Khrushchev responded in a letter of September 28. Referring to Kennedyʼs comment that a serious effort be made to work out an agreement by January 1, 1963, Khrushchev stated that the Soviets would not keep the United States waiting. If an agreement were reached on a ban in three environments, he continued, “there remains the question of underground tests.” Referring to the suggestion of British scientists at the recent Pugwash Conference on Science and World Affairs that automatic unmanned seismic stations could help determine whether an underground tremor was a nuclear blast or an earthquake, Khrushchev stated: “After thinking this suggestion over we came to the conclusion that it can be accepted if this would make it easier to reach an agreement. In this case it could be provided in the treaty banning all nuclear weapon tests that automatic seismic stations be set up both near the borders of the nuclear states and 2-3 such stations directly on the territory of the states possessing nuclear weapons—in the areas most frequently subjected to earthquakes.” Khrushchev proposed that, after reaching agreement on a three environment ban, negotiations continue on an underground ban and that all nuclear powers refrain from carrying out underground tests during the negotiations. For text, see ibid., pages 575-579.

Kennedy replied in an October 8 letter: “I am encouraged by the areas in which we are in accord and by your statement that the Soviet Union is prepared to make ‘new efforts’ in order to conclude an early agreement. Certainly it would seem we are agreed in our approach to three types of tests—in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water.” With respect to underground tests, Kennedy stated that the “development of automatic unmanned seismic mechanisms might very well, if properly worked out, facilitate agreement on the means of actually detecting underground explosions—although my scientists indicate that it would require much more than the two or three such stations you mentioned as being located directly in the areas most frequently subjected to earthquakes. Of course, these mechanical devices would still have to be supplemented by a modest number of on-site inspections.” For text, see ibid., pages 585-586.





240. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Tyler) to the Under Secretary of State (Ball)Source


Washington, September 19, 1962.

SUBJECT

Comments on Secretary Udallʼs Memorandum to the President1



We are in general agreement with the tentative conclusions which Secretary Udall reached after 11 days in the Soviet Union as to the direction Soviet society is taking. With regard to specific points made by the Secretary we have the following observations. The stressing of economic incentives and awards has been a growing practice. However, with reference to the specific examples cited by Secretary Udall, premium wages for priority work in Siberia and other “frontier areas” was standard practice even under Stalin. As for 10-year loans for private homes and the growing attachment of the elite for dacha-living, recent Government pressures have been in the opposite direction, i.e., loans for private homes and dacha construction are now much more difficult to obtain than just a few months ago.

It is true that the Soviets see benefits in the exchanges program with the U.S. and are as a result compelled to pursue a limited “open window” policy. It should be noted, however, that the Soviets have very clear objectives in the exchanges program, utilizing exchanges primarily for the purpose of obtaining as much technical and technological information as possible from the U.S. while giving as little as possible in return. They are also interested in prestigious exchanges, such as performing arts. However, where the exchanges deal with subjects such as exhibits, dissemination of information, etc., which have an obvious impact on Soviet citizenry, and in which we have greater interest than the Soviets, we find the going very heavy indeed. We have recently concluded time-consuming negotiations to arrive at the present exchanges agreement and have the problem of how to utilize these exchanges to our best overall advantage constantly under review. Thus, we do not feel that a fresh study of the problem is called for at this time.

Finally, as a general proposition we recognize that there is a liberalization process taking place within the Soviet Union. In our view, however, this is bound to be an extremely slow process with a dynamic of its own and while we should of course do whatever is possible to further this development, it would be a mistake to believe that we can exert undue influence on it through such actions as high-level exchanges.

With regard to increased high-level exchanges, Secretary Udallʼs trip was of course arranged under the Exchanges Program. It should be noted, however, that the Soviets, in welcoming such exchanges, attach considerable political significance to them and expect the high-level visitor to have a similar political motivation. For this reason we believe that we should reserve high-level visits for times when we have something important to convey to the Soviets. A visit to the USSR by the Attorney General would have inescapable overtones which may or may not be desirable at any given time. In this connection, the Soviet Government utilizes such exchanges to purvey to the Soviet people and the world a sense of normalcy in U.S.-USSR relations which does not in fact exist. We do not, for example, believe that the current time of increasing tensions between the U.S. and the USSR is a propitious one for high-level visits with accompanying atmospherics. Lastly, the only visit to the Soviet Union which would have a real and deep impact on both Soviet leaders and people at large would in our estimation be a visit by the President. Obviously the current state of U.S. and USSR relations and the international situation are not propitious for such a visit.

As regards the prospect of return visits by men in high places such as Frol Kozlov, we understand that Secretary Udallʼs suggestion is in part motivated by his belief that Kozlov is a likely successor to Khrushchev. Indeed, Secretary Udall has asked that the Department give him its consensus on Khrushchevʼs probable successor. A paper addressed to this problem is attached and you may wish to give it to Secretary Udall when you see him. In this connection it should be pointed out that Kozlov visited the U.S. only two years ago when he was a First Deputy Premier. At the present moment, while he holds high offices in the Communist Party, he does not hold an important position in the Soviet Government which might provide a convenient pretext for an invitation. In summary, we believe that high-level visits either way between the U.S. and the USSR should have greater motivation than the belief that they will serve to educate Soviet leadership or open up Soviet society.





Attachment2


PROBABLE SUCCESSION TO PRESENT SOVIET LEADERSHIP FOLLOWING DEATH OR RETIREMENT OF N.S. KHRUSHCHEV

It generally is estimated that the departure of Khrushchev from the top leadership scene will pose less of an immediate problem in the transfer of authority and the maintenance of stable control channels than did the death of Stalin. The top group around Khrushchev, more accustomed to the exercise of both individual and collective responsibility, should be able to retain authority as a leadership “collective” for a more or less extended interregnum period. Some members of this leadership collective are expected to exercise relatively more authority and leadership initiative than others, and it seems inevitable that even initially some focus of authority will be evident. By general consensus, this initial focus most likely will be on the personages of Party Second Secretary F.R. Kozlov, Supreme Soviet Presidium Chairman L.I. Brezhnev, First Deputy Premiers A.N. Kosygin and A.I. Mikoyan and Party Secretary M.A. Suslov, all members of the Party Presidium and Khrushchevʼs leading lieutenants. For the sake of displaying continuity with the past older but lesser figures like N.M. Shvernik and O.V. Kuusinen initially may be given prestige attention without, however, responsibility permitting the exercise of added influence.

There is less of a consensus concerning possible later shifts in the top leadership structure although some of the more dynamic members of the lesser leadership are expected to rise in authority and importance. Of those already on the Party Presidium, A.P. Kirilenko and G.I. Voronov (First Deputy Chairmen of the Central Committeeʼs Bureau for the RSFSR), D. Polyansky (RSFSR Premier) and N.V. Podgorny (First Secretary of the Ukrainian Communist Party) may fall in this category.

Although Kozlov stands high on the list of possible successors to Khrushchev and not infrequently is termed the heir apparent, there can be no assurance that he will emerge sooner or later as the “most equal of equals” in the top leadership. His position as Khrushchevʼs next-in-command in the Central Committee Secretariat both provides him with the opportunity to consolidate his personal position and identifies him to Presidium associates as a person whose authority may need to be “contained” if their own relative positions are not to suffer.

Ambassador Thompson recently has expressed views similar to those outlined above. Somewhat more specifically, he feels that if Khrushchev should depart from the scene now Kozlov and Kosygin might well assume the major Party and Government responsibilities, respectively. As power relationships within the leading group are at best unstable and shift with different times and pressures, however, the Ambassador feels that should Khrushchev remain at the helm the chances are good that in time neither Kozlov nor Kosygin will figure as an heir apparent.





* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100-UD/9-1962. Confidential. Drafted by Guthrie, initialed by Tyler, and sent throughS/S to Ball who also initialed it.

1 Document 238.

2 Confidential.





241. Editorial Note


In a letter of September 28, 1962, to President Kennedy, in which he discussed a nuclear test ban (see Document 239), Chairman Khrushchev also discussed Cuba and Berlin and protested Kennedyʼs September 7 request to Congress for authority to call up the Ready Reserve. He called the request “a step making the atmosphere red-hot” and one “that, naturally, forces the other side to respond in kind. What could it lead to, all the more that you consider that the U.S. has the right to attack Cuba whenever it wishes?” Khrushchev concluded his letter: “I would ask you to correctly understand our anxiety and not to do anything that could further aggravate the atmosphere and even expose the world. We on our part again say to you that we will do nothing with regard to West Berlin until after the elections in the U.S. After the elections, apparently in the second half of November, it would be necessary in our opinion to continue the dialogue.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VI, pages 152-161.





242. Editorial Note


On September 29, 1962, Under Secretary of State Ball forwarded Talking Points on the Congo to President Kennedy for use at a luncheon meeting the next day with British Foreign Secretary Lord Home. Ballʼs paper expressed concern over the possibility that prolonged civil war in the Congo would “create a power vacuum into which the USSR would almost certainly try to move.” Similarly, in an October 2 meeting with the President, Representative to the United Nations Stevenson warned that the consequence of failure in the Congo “would be extremely serious,” resulting in “continuous civil war, and a golden opportunity for the Soviets.” For text of Ballʼs paper and the memorandum of Stevensonʼs conversation with the President, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XX, pages 594-597 and 599-600.

On December 10 during a long discussion about the Congo at a White House staff meeting, Presidentʼs Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs Kaysen said, according to a memorandum for the record, “that the threat of a ‘Soviet presence or menace’ in the Congo was the gut issue—i.e., if we were certain that the Soviets would not rush in to replace us, we would probably try to leave and convince everybody else to do likewise.” For text, see ibid., page 716.





243. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Thompson) to Secretary of State RuskSource


Washington, October 10, 1962.

SUBJECT

Memorandum of luncheon conversation with Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, USSR, Soviet Embassy, Wednesday, October 10, 1962, 1:00 p.m.



Dobrynin asked me to lunch alone today. In discussing inadequacies of his Embassy, he pointed out that the last time Mr. Khrushchev visited the United States, he stayed at Blair House, and had not been aware of the need for better accommodations. Dobrynin said he was hopeful that this time Khrushchev would stay in the Embassy and realize the need for a better one.

This gave me the opportunity to ask when he was likely to come. Dobrynin said this had not yet been decided in Moscow. When I said the rumors seem to indicate the latter part of November, he added “or early December.”

Dobrynin then asked for my personal opinion as to the wisdom of such a visit at this time. I said I found this difficult to answer, to which he interjected that this was a difficult question which was why he was asking my opinion. I went on to say that frequent contacts between the President and Mr. Khrushchev would be helpful as I was convinced that many misunderstandings existed and that at least some of these could be cleared up through closer contact. On the other hand, I said he must be aware of the feeling aroused in this country by developments in Cuba, which did not provide a very good background against which to discuss other questions. I also said that I could not observe, in the exchanges which we had had so far, much hope for a successful settlement of the Berlin question.

Dobrynin indicated he agreed with this view and said that such a meeting was bound to generate hopes which might result in disappointment. He also mentioned the imminence of American elections.

I pointed out that Secretary Rusk had told Mr. Gromyko1 that our elections need play no role in negotiations about Berlin, but said that the Republican Party apparently intended to exploit the Cuban issue in the coming campaign, which might further arouse public sentiment. Mr. Dobrynin said that purely from the point of view of elections, he assumed that next Fall would be the ideal time for a meeting, but then went on to indicate his own view that early December of this year might be an appropriate time. My impression is that he will recommend against any visit at this time but that if Khrushchev insists on coming, it should be some time in early December.

Dobrynin then asked me for my opinion as to what area I thought there was the most hope for some progress in improving our relations. In reply, I said it seemed to me the logical way to approach this question was to seek areas in which our interests in the settlement of a problem coincide most closely. I said that in theory, it seemed to me that an agreement on atomic testing best met this criterion. On the other hand, from my talks with Mr. Khrushchev before my departure from Moscow, I had been obliged to conclude that there appeared to be little hope of an agreement on this problem and had so informed the Secretary. I said I thought this was due to the firmness of their position on the inspection issue. I said I could not see why they could not accept a ban on atmospheric, outer space, and underwater tests. Dobrynin said they could not agree to this as long as we took the position we were going to test underground, and said he did not see why we could not agree to a moratorium of several years. In reply, I referred to Congressional and public opinion as well as the fact that we had a particular problem in keeping our scientists engaged in this work in the absence of any indication that the work would go forward.

Dobrynin observed that we could always have a program of tests prepared for us in case it became necessary. He also suggested that we could educate Congressional and public opinion. I said I understood there was also a considerable division of opinion within the Administration and among the experts. I cautioned him, however, that I was not really in touch with people competent in this field and he should not, therefore, attach much importance to my expressions of personal opinion on this subject.

When Dobrynin indicated that the Soviet military were strongly opposed to an agreement which would leave open the possibility of underground tests, I said this seemed strange to me since I assumed that underground tests would mainly be valuable for the development of small arms, and that we were probably ahead of them in this field. It therefore seemed more to their advantage than ours, from a military point of view, to leave open the possibility of underground tests. Dobrynin replied that if this were, in fact, the case, then we should be able to agree to a moratorium. He also referred to the possible use of automatic unmanned seismic stations, and argued that these should be able to establish whether an explosion was due to an earthquake or an atomic device. He said that earthquakes did not spread their effects evenly, whereas an atomic explosion did, and that by comparing the readings on various stations around the location of the disturbance, one could easily tell its nature. I observed that this would require a considerable number of stations, and I did not know enough to judge how reliable such a system would be, but understood that our experts considered that some inspection of doubtful cases would, in any case, be necessary.

Turning to general disarmament, I referred to my conversation with Mr. Khrushchev on our zonal inspection plan,2 and said that since this met most of their objections to our proposals and was in accord with their principle, that the amount of inspection should be commensurate with the amount of disarmament, I could not understand why they had not more seriously considered our proposals. Dobrynin did not seem to have any answer to this but merely observed that he had to admit that we had at last produced a fairly comprehensive disarmament program.

On the Berlin question, Dobrynin asked me if I did not think that our principals, meaning Secretary Rusk and Mr. Gromyko, had at least made some little progress in their last talk. I said that there had been some little movement in the talks between us; that anything new, no matter how slight, looked important. He said he did not have a full report, but was going to New York shortly to see Mr. Gromyko. Dobrynin observed that of course no progress had been made on the principal question, which was the removal of our troops, but as the hour was late, we did not pursue the matter further.



* * *



* Source: Department of Sate,S/AL Files: Lot 67 D 2. Secret. Drafted by Thompson. Copies were sent to Bundy, Tyler, Foster, and Martin J. Hillenbrand (Director of the Berlin Task Force and of the Office of German Affairs).

1 For a record of Ruskʼs conversation with Gromyko, October 6, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XV, pp. 348-351.

2 See Document 214.





244. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, October 12, 1962.

Sino-Soviet Relations Continue To Deteriorate

The closing of the last two Soviet consulates in China is the latest illustration of the steady deterioration in governmental relations resulting from the Sino-Soviet controversy over party doctrine.

According to some reports, the consulates were closed at Peipingʼs request. The Soviet Embassy in Moscow has tried to put a better face on the matter by depicting the closing as an economy measure. It is possible that the Chinese, taking a leaf from their treatment of US consuls in China during 1949 and 1950, conducted such a campaign of harassment that the USSR decided it had no recourse but to shut down the consulates.

Some evidence of Chinese harassment is provided by White Russians who recently left Manchuria. According to one report, Chinese authorities rejected protests of the Soviet consul general in Harbin relating to procedures governing the departure of Russian residents. The Chinese were said to have replied that they were masters in the area. According to the White Russian refugees, Chinese troops threw a security cordon around the Harbin consulate several weeks before it closed. At the same time, the Chinese reportedly raided the quarters of a Soviet citizensʼ organization in Harbin. The activities of such organizations have been directed since World War II by Soviet consular officials.

The Chinese pressures against the consulates may have reflected Peipingʼs view that they provided bases for subversion that could not be ignored in the context of the growing estrangement between the two countries. In this connection, the Chinese could have recalled the subversive activity fostered by Soviet consulates in Sinkiang during the 1940s.

In its anxiety to diminish the Russian presence in China, Peiping appears to be expediting the emigration of White Russians, whom the Chinese regard as a suspect segment of the population. Well over 400 White Russians arrived in Hong Kong in September. This total compared with figures of about 170 in August and of only 50 or so per month earlier in the year.

Peipingʼs concerns about security have apparently led to increases in the contingent of border guards along the Soviet frontier, at least near Manchouli. Reports from the White Russians appear to be corroborated by a letter received by a recent Chinese Communist defector. The letter refers to the training of a Chinese public security unit for border-guard duty near Manchouli. The defector believes that this activity reflects Chinese Communist concern about subversive operations in the frontier area.

These measures to tighten state security have been accompanied by allusions in recent Chinese propaganda to “revisionist” efforts to subvert members of the Chinese Communist Party. A sign that these efforts may be continuing was provided by the publication in Pravda on 28 September of a “new document” purporting to be a decipherment of a hitherto missing Lenin draft. The Soviets claim that the document is an earlier version of certain chapters of Leninʼs report on “The Immediate Tasks of Soviet Rule,” which he had presented at the April 1918 session of the highest governmental body in Russia at that time.

The “new document” was offered by Pravda as a rebuttal to Chinese jeers at Soviet “economism”—i.e., an excessive concern for economic development, with a consequent refusal to wage the struggle against the West with sufficient militancy. Lenin was represented as affirming that political tasks are subordinate to economic tasks after a Communist party has come to power. “Agitators,” according to Leninʼs newly discovered precepts, were useful mainly for the tasks of seizing power; later and more complex economic tasks were said to require “practical leaders and organizers.” The implication that Communist China should borrow from the experience of the USSR was contained in Leninʼs alleged observation about learning from the “neighboring and very much more developed countries.”

The “new document” thus invokes Lenin in support of Khrushchevʼs long-standing condemnation of the extremist economic programs promoted by Mao and his associates against the objections of more realistic sections of the party. The Chinese leaders are obviously sensitive about such appeals by Moscow to susceptible elements in China. Recent Chinese statements ominously suggest the vulnerability of such elements in any new party purge.

For those who might have questions about the presence of these unreliables in the armed forces, Communist Chinaʼs chief of staff included some pointed remarks in a speech on 6 October. He “expressed the hope,” according to the Chinese Communist news agency, that the army would be the agent of further victories “in the defense of the party central committee and Chairman Mao.” He exhorted the armed forces to heightened vigilance against the countryʼs enemies “no matter who they are.”



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 3-4 of the Weekly Review section of the issue.





245. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, October 13, 1962, 2 p.m.

955. Embtel 945.1 With expulsion Midthun (following expulsion Commander Smith),2 Embassy now has presumably paid in full for way in which trap was sprung on Nelson Drummond in New York and two Soviet diplomatic officers apprehended, photographed and detained.3 Cost to U.S. Government in terms of deprival specially qualified and trained personnel and impairment of operations of this Embassy is significant.

Fully recognizing the importance to U.S. security of disrupting activities such as those of Drummond, must nonetheless question whether, in fact, Drummond case (which according to news reports has been going on in at least partially controlled fashion for years) could not have been resolved in a way that would meet those security requirements without involving such cost to ourselves.

Apart from the ill effect on Embassy operations and prestige of retaliatoryPNG actions, consideration must also be given to the personal security of Embassy officers who are required in the course of their official duties to be exposed to whatever form of maltreatment the Soviet Secret Police find appropriate or amusing. Given the nature of this society, the Soviets can always beat us in the application of humiliation, force, duress and coercion. Midthun received the most gentle possible kind of treatment. Commander Smith got a small taste of what can happen. Military Attaché officers, because of the nature of their assignments including travel to and in isolated areas, are particularly vulnerable, though this is also true to a lesser extent of non-military as well.

Would hope foregoing considerations could be brought to the attention of all appropriate elements of U.S. Government and kept in mind in the not unlikely event of future cases involving Soviet diplomatic personnel.

As regards our reaction now to Smith and Midthun expulsions, believe Soviets consider balance has been effected. (The circumstances of the Midthun action, i.e., failure thus far to document allegation against him, would indicate they do not want to go beyond simple man-for-man reciprocity by establishing a second full-blown incident.) Department will have noted that two elements of U.S. Government involved in Prokhorov/Vyrodov affairs have been involved in retaliatory actions here: Navy (Smith and Drummond) andFBI (Midthunʼs previous association with the bureau cannot be unknown to the Soviets).

In the circumstances, believe we should not propose further expulsion of Soviets in U.S. in connection this matter since Soviet Government would undoubtedly consider this as opening a new round.

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 123-Midthun, Kermit S. Confidential.

1 Telegram 945, October 12, transmitted the text of note from the Soviet Foreign Ministry requesting Kermit S. Midthun, First Secretary at the Embassy in Moscow, to leave the country for activities incompatible with his status as an accredited diplomat. (Ibid.) A copy of Midthunʼs report on the incident on September 23, which brought this action, was transmitted as an enclosure to airgram A-563 from Moscow, October 19. (Ibid.)

2 On October 2 the U.S. Naval Attaché, Commander Raymond D. Smith, had been forcibly seized, searched, and held for 4-1/2 hours in Leningrad without being able to communicate with the Embassy. Despite an Embassy protest on October 4, Smith was expelled from the Soviet Union. (ALUSNA 031605Z and telegram 849 from Moscow, October 3 and 4; ibid., 120.162261/10-362 and 10-462)

3 On September 28 Nelson Drummond, a U.S. Navy enlisted man, and two officials from the Soviet U.N. Mission were arrested in Larchmont, New York, with classified documents in their possession. The Department of State summarized the case, in which the Soviet officials were described as “uncooperative” and “resistant,” in telegram 821 to Moscow, October 5. (Ibid., 304.61/10-562)





246. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Bowles) to President KennedySource


Washington, October 14, 1962.

REPORT OF CONVERSATION WITH AMBASSADOR DOBRYNIN ON SATURDAY, OCTOBER 13th, REGARDING CUBA AND OTHER SUBJECTS

A week ago Ambassador Dobrynin called my office to say that he understood I was leaving for Africa and would like to have our “long postponed luncheon” before my departure.

I met him at the U.S.S.R. Embassy on 16th Street at 1 p.m. on October 13th. With the exception of an occasional exchange of courtesies at diplomatic functions, this was the first time I had talked with him.

It was a frank, free-wheeling discussion, lasting more than an hour and a half. Dobryninʼs manner was pleasant, with a show of reasonableness and concern about the current drift in Soviet-American relations.

At my first opportunity, I expressed deep disappointment that no more progress had been made in reducing tensions and concern over the consequences of a further decline. I said that since I was speaking wholly unofficially, he should not attempt to read anything into my remarks. I would like to be utterly frank with him.

Almost immediately Dobrynin brought up the question of Cuba and expressed worry and surprise at the intensity of U.S. public reaction.

In response to his question as to why we attached such importance to a relatively small island, I outlined the history of U.S.-Cuban relations and drew a parallel to the situation in 1898, the presence of Spanish misrule, and the U.S. public agitation that abetted the outbreak of war.

When he protested that the Soviet presence in Cuba was no greater provocation than the U.S. presence in Turkey, I pointed out that the present Administration had inherited a status quo that had grown up since the war. In some areas the advantage in this status quo had been with us, in others with Moscow; in still others it was a stand-off.

Our presence in Greece and Turkey, for instance, represented our reaction to Stalinʼs military and political pressures against these two countries following the war. It had become part of a status quo which in all its complexity could safely be changed only by negotiation with reciprocal benefits to each side.

The Kennedy Administration had hoped and expected that we could in fact negotiate a more rational set of relationships, easing the various danger points on a basis of reciprocal action to everyoneʼs benefit.

However, in Cuba the U.S.S.R. had unilaterally altered this status quo by introducing a wholly new element. Our reaction, in these circumstances, should have been foreseeable.

Moreover, many U.S. students of Soviet affairs were soberly convinced that the U.S.S.R. had made this move deliberately to provoke a U.S. military response against Cuba on the theory that this would divert our energies from Berlin, and elsewhere, and enable Soviet spokesmen to charge us with aggression in the UN.

If this kind of thinking had in fact played a part in the Soviet analysis, it was extremely dangerous. If we did move into Cuba in response to some overt act or offensive build-up by the U.S.S.R., a global chain of events might be set in motion which could have catastrophic consequences.

For instance, the Soviets might then be tempted to take what they would term “counter-action” in Berlin and perhaps Turkey; and the United States, by that time in an extremely tense mood, would react with vigor.

The U.S.S.R., in turn, would feel pressed by the Chinese and other extremists to counter our moves, and we would be on our way together down the long slippery slide.

I asked Dobrynin if he had read The Guns of August.1 He said “only a three-page summary.”

I urged him to read at least the first few chapters in which he would see a pattern of politico-military action and counter-action that could be repeated in the next six months.

In July 1914, men of intelligence in Russia, Germany, Austria-Hungary, France and England, all quite conscious of the forces which were feeding the approaching holocaust, found themselves enmeshed in internal pressures, commitments and precedents which left them powerless to avoid the inevitable. It would be the greatest folly in history if we were to repeat this insane process in the nuclear age.

Dobrynin asked me what, in the circumstances, I thought could be done in regard to Cuba. Stressing that I was speaking solely as an individual, I suggested three moves that the U.S.S.R. could sponsor to ease the situation.

1. Dobrynin should remind his government of President Kennedyʼs sharp distinction between defensive and offensive weapons in his recent statement. I was particularly concerned on this point because current reports indicated that Soviet shipments were in fact beginning to include weapons which had a clearly offensive capacity.

If this continued, it could produce—with the help of some incident perpetrated perhaps by individuals striving to provoke another “Remember the Maine” incident—the very conflict which the Administration is anxious to avoid. President Kennedy had committed himself to act under certain specific circumstances. This was a clear commitment, and the U.S.S.R. should not take it lightly.



2. From many reports, Castro now had ample defensive arms with which to protect himself from casual landings. The U.S.S.R. should tell him that under present circumstances no more arms will be shipped. The U.S.S.R. should then ask Castro himself to make a statement announcing that the defense of Cuba was assured and that no more arms were needed. Moscow could then inform us that no more arms would be shipped.

3. Castro should be asked by Moscow to state that he has no design on his neighbors, that his entire energies would henceforth be devoted to the economic development of Cuba, and that he sought only peaceful competition with other Latin American nations. His decision not to indulge in further subversion, propaganda, and expansion in neighboring Latin American countries would, of course, have to be confirmed by deeds. However, Soviet assurances on this point would serve to reduce some of the current tensions and give us all a breathing spell.



If some progress along these lines were not possible, I had deep forebodings about the weeks ahead.

To all of this Dobrynin appeared to listen intently. I believe he was impressed.

He answered that in spite of our worries, the U.S.S.R. was not shipping offensive weapons and well understood the dangers of doing so. Moreover, it was unreasonable for the U.S., as a major power, to expect a small, weak country such as Cuba to make such public concessions to U.S. public opinion even though both the U.S.S.R. and Cuba might accept all three points in principle.

Why, he asked repeatedly, do we get so excited about so small a nation? Although the U.S.S.R. could not let Cuba down, they had no desire to complicate the situation further. Was it not possible for us to negotiate a modus vivendi with Castro directly?

I commented that Cuba had initiated the current conflict. Indeed, in 1959 most Americans had strongly applauded Castroʼs revolution. If Dobrynin were misinformed about the types of weapons now arriving in Cuba, it would not be the first time in diplomatic history that this had occurred. As long as Soviet weapons flowed into Cuba and Cuban money was used to subvert Latin American countries which we were striving to assist into the 20th century, the situation would remain dangerously explosive.

I hoped that his government would see the danger and act accordingly to help ease the tensions.

Without directly responding to my remarks, Dobrynin referred to Max Frankelʼs story in the morning Times which cited agitation by various private agencies, Cuban and American, to provoke a “Maine incident” with the connivance of U.S. official groups. I replied that our government would have no part in such an operation, that we were genuinely worried, and that his government should view the situation with serious concern.

Dobrynin then switched the subject: What did I think of a meeting between Khrushchev and the President this fall or early winter?

Speaking purely for myself, I said I felt that such a meeting would be worthwhile only if we could be assured in advance of some areas of agreement. Otherwise it would only result, as had the meeting in June 1961, in a further sharpening of our differences, in a frustration of public hopes, and a strengthening of the extremists in both Russia and America.

Dobrynin said that this was precisely his view; but on what subjects could we agree?

I suggested several possibilities. For instance, the U.S.S.R. could state that it endorsed the Cuban position (along the lines of my suggestion) that no more arms were needed and that no more would be shipped; also that it endorsed the proposed Cuban statement that Cuba would forego expansionist exploits and would henceforth concentrate on internal development.

We should also be able to agree on a nuclear test ban in the atmosphere and under the sea, as well as cooperation between our two governments to conduct research in regard to underground testing, with a report on this subject to be prepared within some stated period. On the basis of this agreement, we could then announce our intention to work together to discourage other nations, including China, from developing nuclear weapons.

Parenthetically, I added that I could not understand the U.S.S.R.ʼs reluctance to deal seriously with arms control and reductions on a broad scale. I said that in February 1957 I had chided Khrushchev about being a poor Marxist, since otherwise he should assume that a capitalist nation such as the U.S. could not agree to arms reduction without facing economic collapse—and should therefore press for an agreement which we could not refuse.2

What, I asked, was holding up the serious, thoughtful negotiations on the broad subject of arms control that most of us hoped would by now be underway? The longer we postponed such discussion, the harder it would be to reach agreement. In the present competition we had all the immediate advantages since our economy had plenty of slack; yet it was a crazy, dangerous contest for all concerned, however you looked at it.

Dobrynin said frankly that in the U.S.S.R., as in the U.S., there were differences of view, that suspicions ran deep, and that no generals ever had enough weapons.

In further references to a meeting between Khrushchev and the President, I suggested that agreement could be reached to put Berlin on ice until we could discuss the situation in a less emotional atmosphere.

Why not frankly say just that? We realized that Khrushchev was in a difficult situation because of his statements four years ago that we would soon be out of Berlin; but surely he must realize that we were totally committed to staying there.

I then urged with great emphasis that the U.S.S.R. should not minimize the depth of this commitment. On the essential point of the U.S. presence in Berlin, we have absolutely no room for maneuver.

The 11,000 Western troops in Berlin had no military significance. They were purely a symbol of our rights there.

If we increased the symbolic number by 5000, the U.S.S.R. would react because the symbol had been changed; just so, our friends would react if we moved the symbol downward by 5000. For this reason, there was no basis for a negotiation of our presence under present conditions.

Even if differences should arise with our allies as to how to respond to “Ulbrichtʼs pressures,” we Americans would be forced to react, alone if necessary—move for move, threat for threat. We had absolutely no alternative. Khrushchev simply must understand this, or there could be a tragedy.

Dobrynin nodded but said nothing.

These were some of the things that could be agreed on in a Kennedy-Khrushchev meeting. They wouldnʼt assure world peace; but they would give both nations a fresh chance and some urgently needed room for maneuver and reduced tensions. Unless some such understandings could be reached, a meeting between the two principals might cause us to lose more ground.

We then talked briefly of Germany as a whole. I said that many of us shared Soviet concern over Germanʼs past tendencies towards aggression, and that “their Germans” were largely Prussians who had traditionally led the parades. Why not get rid of Ulbricht so that we could all talk more reasonably?

Our support of the Common Market and British participation was not only a result of our desire to see the construction of an efficient, united Europe, but because we wanted to see Germany peacefully and politically involved as a member of a united Europe, with Britain—which has great skill in this respect—acting as a balancing force. I stressed that this political objective was also in Moscowʼs ultimate interest.

A re-united, floating Germany, as an (unlikely) alternative, could scarcely resist an effort to bargain Moscow and Washington against each other, with even more unpredictable and potentially explosive results.

We then talked briefly of Afghanistan. I said that if what the U.S.S.R. really wants there is a buffer state, we should work together frankly to this end. The U.S. has absolutely no military objectives there. Indeed, in 1953 when the Afghan government asked us for military equipment and a military training mission, we refused because Afghanistan was traditionally neutral, directly bordering on the U.S.S.R., and under such circumstances a U.S. military mission would be provocative. It was unfortunate that the Soviets had not shown similar restraint in regard to Cuba.

Dobrynin answered that the U.S.S.R. agreed on Afghanistanʼs proper neutral position, but that we Americans were encouraging or at least tolerating Pakistanʼs “belligerent pressures” against Afghanistan. This was bad for everyone and seriously jeopardized the proper buffer-state status of the Afghans. (This was his only barbed comment.)

Finally, we turned to mainland China. I reiterated our intention of defending Taiwan against any Chinese attack and our determination not to allow Chiang to start trouble. Dobrynin said that Chiang was dangerous to all of us; I responded that he was far less so than Ulbricht.

In response to Dobryninʼs questions, I discussed Formosaʼs economic success, its land reform, high literacy, the deep distaste of its people for the mainland government, and their preference even for Japanese rule if they were ever forced to choose between the two.

I said that in my recent visits to Asia I found widespread understanding of the extent of Communist Chinaʼs failure. The hopes created by the “Great Leap Forward” were totally shattered.

Why, therefore, didnʼt the U.S.S.R. really take charge in Hanoi and insist on a live-and-let-live solution in East and Southeast Asia?

Of course, much depended on Laos. This was the test of everyoneʼs intentions.

Dobrynin insisted with vigor that we were incorrect in saying that Moscow had allowed the Vietminh to remain in Laos. According to Soviet information, they were now practically all gone.

Why then, I asked, not allow the ICC to look and see for itself? He said that this could be worked out.

We returned to Chinaʼs future. I pointed out that China, unlike Russia, lacked key natural resources—particularly oil and arable land. Someday the U.S.S.R. and the U.S., working together, could bring effective pressure to bear on China—the U.S.S.R. through oil and the U.S. through food. Why should we delay?

I said we understood that the Soviets were now supplying 70% of Chinaʼs petroleum; he commented “Itʼs more than that,” and he added that oil would soon be flowing directly to China from the “newly discovered unlimited Siberian oil fields only a few hundred kilometers from the Chinese borders.”

I asked if this did not cause concern in Moscow since a successful grab by the Peking government for the new Siberian oil and Siberiaʼs wheat potential could make China self-sufficient. “In that case,” I added facetiously, “we might help guarantee your borders—provided by that time we are on speaking terms, with no Berlin and Cuba to cause us trouble.”

Seriously, I asked, why should we quarrel? Neither we nor the U.S.S.R. can run the world, since it is much too diversified. Burmese want to be Burmese; Brazilians, Brazilians; Japanese, Japanese. No one wants to be run by either Moscow or Washington. Together we cannot only keep the world from exploding; we can create rational relationships that will benefit all of us, eventually even China.

In the course of his many questions and comments, Dobrynin stressed what he called the Soviet Governmentʼs desire for better understanding, its inability to fathom U.S. public opinion, its irritation over the fact that we are constantly saying “wait until after the election—and you are always having elections,” its concern over its own internal needs, and its rejection of my “thesis that the U.S.S.R., Cuba or someone else should make all the concessions.”

Yet I came away feeling that his concern was genuine. Our reactions to Cuba appear to have surprised him, and he is frankly at a loss how to explain them. He returned to this question again and again.

Dobrynin politely asked me about my African trip and said he would look forward to a “further discussion” on my return. This occasion, he said, had been most helpful to him in understanding how “you Americans look at things.”



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 601.6111/10-1562. Secret. The source text is attached to an October 15 memorandum of transmittal from Bowles to Rusk. Copies were sent to Ball and U. Alexis Johnson.

1 Barbara Tuchman, The Guns of August, New York, 1962.

2 For a short summary of Bowlesʼ conversation with Khrushchev, February 20, 1957, see Chester B. Bowles, Promises to Keep, New York, 1971, p. 252.





247. Editorial Note


On the morning of October 14, 1962, a U-2 aircraft flying a reconnaissance mission over the western part of Cuba produced the first verified evidence of the existence of Soviet offensive missile sites in Cuba. Two further U-2 missions on October 15 revealed additional ballistic missile sites. McGeorge Bundy notified President Kennedy the morning of October 16, and the President immediately called a meeting of his principal advisers, during which they began to formulate a policy to respond to the Soviet threat. These deliberations marked the beginning of Cuban missile crisis, the most dangerous U.S.-Soviet confrontation during the cold war.

Extensive documentation on the missile crisis and its aftermath, including the subsequent, lesser known “Soviet bomber crisis,” the U.S.-Soviet failure to negotiate a post-crisis resolution, and the ongoing problem of Soviet military forces in Cuba, is in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XI, Cuban Missile Crisis and Aftermath, and the microfiche supplement. Given the documentation in volume XI, material on this aspect of U.S.-Soviet relations from mid-October through the end of 1962 will not be cross-referenced through Editorial Notes in this volume. For Soviet Ambassador Dobryninʼs recollections of the missile crisis, see his In Confidence, pages 71-95.





248. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, October 16, 1962, 2 p.m.

970. Policy. I met with Khrushchev for three hours in talk which ended only because at that point Khrushchev was giving luncheon for Kekkonen.1 Agreed at end we would both say to press we discussed important international questions and questions relating to American-Soviet relations in meeting characterized by frankness and mutual understanding. Khrushchev was accompanied by Acting Foreign Minister Kuznetsov, Chief of US Section Smirnovsky and interpreter; I by Counselor Davies. Atmosphere was cordial and frank with no tirades.

Aside from amenities and generalities, talk covered harassment of Soviet vessels, Cuba, U-2 incidents, nuclear testing, Germany and Berlin and meeting between President and Khrushchev.

Khrushchev confirmed intention to come to New York latter part of November and expressed hope to meet President. I replied on lines pen-ultimate paragraph Deptel 864.2 Khrushchev said we could be sure he would take no action before meeting which would make situation more difficult.

On harassment Soviet vessel, I used paragraph 2 my instructions on Sept. 6,3 adding material from second paragraph Deptel 864. Specific information re Soviet harassment USS Tanner was most timely and useful and gave Khrushchev pause. He provided me with specifics of one incident as reported in full account which follows4 and circumstantial description of another. This led to discussion of Cuba in which Khrushchev took general line ofTASS statement and Gromykoʼs speech.5 He raised particularly our efforts impede Soviet air communications with Cuba, which I confirmed, pointing out our refusal to support or help Castro regime did not constitute an attack or internal interference. He assured me on “word of honor” fishing base was purely for fishing and would remain so. Regretted that announcement had been published during electoral campaign in US which was due to his own absence from Moscow.

On U-2, I used paragraph 1 my instructions which he accepted. He also seemed to accept, although complaining of nearness of our approaches, that both sides engaged in electronic surveillance.

On nuclear testing, I used paragraph 4 of my instructions, saying they supplemented other communications between us on this subject in meantime. He professed to feel this question nearly resolved and could be finalized in meeting with President. However, despite long discussion improvement in methods of detection and strong plea on my part re essentiality of verification he refused to commit himself to any inspection.

On Berlin, Khrushchev, took the standard Soviet line. Since time was then running short, I did not comment at length, pointing out that both President and Secretary would be discussing this subject with Gromyko October 18 (Deptel 892).6 Neither Khrushchev nor Kuznetsov had heard this from Gromyko but Khrushchev expressed gratitude to President.

Should appreciate guidance on briefing Allies and especially Brit, French and German colleagues here, who will besiege me on subject tomorrow.7

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/10-1662. Secret; Priority; Eyes Only. Kohler had presented his credentials on September 27.

1 Urho K. Kekkonen, President of Finland.

2 Telegram 864, October 10, informed Kohler that his instructions did not need updating, but offered specific details on the Soviet harassment of the USS Tanner in August and September and mentioned that the President hoped to meet with Khrushchev if he came to New York for the United Nations General Assembly session. (Department of State, Central Files, 123 Kohler)

3 Document 233.

4 Not further identified.

5 For text of the TASS statement, September 11, see Pravda or Izvestia, September 16, 1962; for text of Gromykoʼs speech before the United Nations General Assembly, September 21, see U.N. doc. A/PV.1127, pp. 37-48.

6 Telegram 892, October 15, reported that Gromyko would meet with the President and Secretary of State on October 18. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/10-1562)

7 In telegram 912 to Moscow, October 16, the Department of State authorized Kohler to brief his colleagues in general terms on the subjects of U-2 flights and harassment of vessels and more fully on Cuba and Berlin. Kohler was advised to restrict his summary on nuclear testing to an expression of Khrushchevʼs optimism that some final agreement might be reached, but should not reveal that the Chairman intended to come to New York. (Ibid., 761.5411/10-1662)





249. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, October 16, 1962, 5 p.m.

973. Policy. Khrushchev-Kohler Part I—Introductory remarks: I opened conversation by saying I was glad to be back and had been struck by changes I had seen. I intended listen very well, report accurately, and also set forth as clearly as possible policies of President and desire people of US to preserve peace.

Khrushchev said this was good platform.

I replied it is Presidentʼs platform.

Khrushchev said glad to hear you have this kind platform and weʼll do our best to help you fulfill it. You were last here with Nixon. We have succeeded in doing great deal in time that has passed since. You havenʼt been here long enough to see all the changes that have been made and even when you were here earlier you didnʼt see everything because you were flying. I am personally very glad to tell you my feelings about those changes. I worked very close to Stalin here in Moscow and in Ukraine. Stalinʼs sickness was that he didnʼt believe anyone and always thought they had secrets from him, so he had secrets from those who were close to him, even from me. He never shared his plans. He regarded his task as leader of party and people as that of prophet. He thought he was only one who could see what was happening and would happen. One day he fell violently upon Mikoyan. I donʼt remember what the occasion was. He said, “When I die youʼll all perish. Imperialists will strangle you.” He underestimated people who worked around him. We had nothing to do with foreign policy. Only he and Molotov handled that. I didnʼt even see the documents. So when Stalin died it was a very hard time for us. For example, I had never met any foreigners, because this was treason, but contacts are very necessary. When Stalin died it was difficult for us to establish contacts. And we had acute questions before us: Austrian Treaty, Trieste, Japanese Treaty. Most difficult one was Korean war, which had been imposed on us by US. It was very difficult period for us inexperienced people. But we took an initiative to stop Korean war. We established contact with US and Americans understood our purpose and we settled war. True, problem of Korea still remains because foreign troops are still there, but nevertheless there is no shooting.

He continued, we decided question of Indo-China. Americans didnʼt keep their word, and supported Diem. Americans know when to support nation-wide election and when not to. We liquidated Trieste question. We liquidated our base at Port Arthur, Finnish bases, and Iranian border problem. We thought Americans would follow our good example but they were not so kind as to do so. We've cut our armed forces twofold, but Americans continue increase theirs. We've done much work in agriculture, industry, and housing.

After war, Stalin said if we could produce 60 million tons oil and same amount of steel we would have one foot in communism. We will have 185 million tons of oil this year and we have 56 and half million tons steel for first nine months this year and will have 67 million tons for all 1962. Your economist Harry Schwartz points out that for one period this year we will have produced same amount of steel as you. In 1961, we built 3.9 million square meters housing. Before revolution Moscow had 11 million square meters, result of 800 years capitalist-feudal structure. And those were wooden houses with poor sewer system. But now we build very solid houses and in one year construct one-third the number of houses as there were in all pre-1917 Moscow. Main thing, however, is that imperialists didnʼt strangle us.

I said we hadnʼt tried and didnʼt want to try to strangle USSR.

Khrushchev replied he couldnʼt say there was no desire to do so. He produced the Presidentʼs speech in Buffalo1 and said that, according to President, USSR is oppressing Poland but “Poland has still not perished”. Khrushchev added that this is old Polish nationalist slogan. This, then, was prelude to his meeting with Mr. Kohler. This was obviously campaign speech in which President making election promises to get Polish votes. President says US will free Polish people, but Poles freed selves long ago with America. We regret Americans are aggravating tensions between our countries. Such is nature of imperialism.

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/10-1662. Secret; Priority; Eyes Only.

1 For text of the Presidentʼs remarks at the Pulaski Day Parade in Buffalo, October 14, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1962, pp. 782-783.





250. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, October 16, 1962, 5 p.m.

974. Policy. Khrushchev-Kohler Part II. Harassment of Shipping. Khrushchev asked me inform President that “hooligan overflights” of Soviet ships continue to take place in all seas and demanded “How long will it last?”

I said I had had long talk with President before I came1 and knew there had been communications both ways on subject, but I could add some background to conversation Khrushchev had had with Ambassador Thompson and to correspondence.

But first I wanted to say it had been very interesting to hear what the Chairman had said and I appreciated particularly his description of differences between Stalinʼs time and today. As foreigner who served in Moscow during Stalinʼs time, I could feel difference now and was glad we could talk as we were. While we appreciated their efforts in foreign policy, we believed positive achievements which had been reached had been due to joint effort. US had tried to help in reaching those decisions. I was sure I reflected Presidentʼs attitude in saying that we compliment Chairman and Soviet people on what they have done to make progress in their economy. We hoped progress made by all peoples would redound to benefit of all mankind in peaceful world.

I didnʼt have text of Presidentʼs Buffalo speech, so I would reserve comment on this and just say that we have very close feeling for Poland and believe Poles should have had greater freedom of choice. But I was sure Presidentʼs speech had no provocative intent.

On question Chairman had asked re overflights, I had discussed this with President and he wanted me to make following clear (I then read appropriate portion my instructions of Sept 6,2 supplementing from Deptel 8643 ).

Evidently somewhat taken aback by description of buzzing of Tanner, Khrushchev commented he could not say anything about this since he did not have facts. He said it not Soviet policy to create obstacles to navigation on high seas. But Americans do have such a system and engage in these practices according to system. He was surprised that President was so unaware of this and wanted further evidence about it. When he talked with Ambassador Thompson, President gave orders not to do it. It stopped for a few days, then began again. Now I said US ships had orders not to fire at Soviet ships. We must not shoot at each other, for that would be war. There have been demands by US warships for Soviet ships to stop but he had given orders to them not to submit.

Khrushchev then recounted anecdote about Soviet ship en route to Cuba which US destroyer hailed and asked for destination. Soviet ship continued on way whereupon destroyer demanded it stop. Soviet captain then ordered radioman transmit continuously to US ship: “Peace and friendship”. Destroyer then replied “Peace and friendship” and left Soviet ship alone.

I asked when this had happened and Khrushchev said he could give me date and place if I wished.

I said I knew President did not want our ships to interfere with navigation and would be interested to know of any incidents in which his orders were not being obeyed.

Khrushchev then produced memo describing alleged incident Sept 23 in Aegean Sea in which Soviet commercial vessel Fryanovo, buzzed by two US navy planes from Carrier No. 65 (translation follows septel).4

I said President would be interested and matter would be investigated.

Khrushchev then spoke circumstantially about incident supposed to have occurred about one month ago in which, after having buzzed Soviet commercial vessel, plane crashed in sea and all aboard drowned, despite rescue attempt by Soviets. When he was asked what should be done about crash, Khrushchev ordered his people to wait since Americans usually publish this kind of news. Since nothing was published, it clear this had been military aircraft and news had been concealed from US people.

I said such crash could not happen without publication of news and asked if he sure this was American plane.

Khrushchev said he knew nothing had been published, since he had followed newspapers, and added he would give us information on incident.

I said we could check into it even without details but it would be helpful have these.

At this point, Smirnovsky pointed out that interpreter had not translated sentence from my remarks to effect that some Soviet shipmasters in their reports might be confusing normal maritime recognition procedures with harassment. Khrushchev said he not aware of norms of recognition at sea, but no nation had right to hinder vessels in international waters. These were not US territorial waters.

When he came to New York by ship a few years ago and was greeted by “dogsʼ concert”, he recognized it was our right stage such greeting since it took place in our territorial waters. But Soviets did not recognize any nationʼs right to stop Soviet ship on high seas.

After again denying we do so, I once more made point that some shipmasters may confuse recognition procedures with harassment.

With some heat Khrushchev said that when planes fly repeatedly over ships and their identification numbers are visible, what kind of recognition was that? These were provocative actions which had nothing to do with good intentions and did not contribute to better relations between our two countries.

I said I agreed and President agreed and I would report Chairmanʼs statements to him.

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 761.5411/10-1662. Secret; Priority; Eyes Only.

1 Kohler had talked with the President for about 30 minutes on September 6, but other than an entry in the Presidentʼs Appointment Book, no record of the conversation has been found. ( Kennedy Library)

2 Document 233.

3 See footnote 2, Document 248.

4 Telegram 980 from Moscow, October 16. (Department of State, Central Files, 761.5411/10-1662)





251. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, October 16, 1962, 7 p.m.

979. Policy. Khrushchev-Kohler—Part IV1 —U-2; Cuban fishing port; nuclear test-ban; US elections. Khrushchev said he had to give President his due. He was a good politician and picked good men to work for him. Khrushchev had had very good conversation with Secretary Udall, who understands his job, is very free and has a free mind.2 Udall made very good impression and Khrushchev would give him job as minister if he did not already have job. Of course, Udall represents capitalism and Khrushchev is communist, but this didnʼt interfere with conversation. Khrushchev gave Udall film about Soviet electrification and asked him to show it to President. President is very clever at making speeches: he is a “demagogue of great note.” But he didnʼt mean that in a bad way.

I said he probably meant President was a good politician.

Khrushchev agreed. He said President Eisenhower was not a bad man, but politics was “not his dish.” He still owed President Eisenhower something, because Eisenhower had sent him a bull. He had wanted to send Eisenhower a sheep, but then Powers case occurred. Khrushchev had been on Eisenhower farm and wanted to repay him. He had also received bull from Admiral whose name he couldnʼt recall.

I said it was Admiral Strauss, who had just written interesting book about his years in public service.3 (Khrushchev asked Kuznetsov to get book for him.)

I said Khrushchev would not be surprised that his remarks reminded me of another point I wished to mention: incident with U-2 plane on which we had exchanged notes. I then read appropriate portion of my instructions.4

Khrushchev said he was very glad to hear what I had said and he believed Presidentʼs words. At the time, he had asked his military people and they said weather had been very bad, with result violation could have been unintentional. He then asked what it was that drew us to Soviet borders, saying Soviets do not violate US borders. No doubt it was just the way imperialists acted.

I said reason was the same as that which made their trawlers do the same thing.

Khrushchev said Soviets stayed in international waters and didnʼt violate US borders.

I agreed but said that this was electronic age and both sides apparently liked to listen to electronic emission.

Khrushchev asked whether we should dig ourselves deeper into ground and just sit there.

I said no, but we should use good judgment and that is what President wants to do.

Reverting to Cuba, Khrushchev said he wished to assure President that port regarding which Soviets had signed agreement was just fishing port. “I give you my word.” He said he would reveal a state secret. While he was away, they had signed agreement without consulting him. When he came back he cursed them and said they should have waited until after US elections. Japanese fish off Brazil and have a base there where fish are processed. Cubans couldnʼt build port themselves so Soviets decided to help them. But agreement had been signed at wrong time. If they had asked him, he would have said sign it November 10 or 15, because he knew it would provide fuel to Republicans who are frying President at the moment. Since Soviets value good relations with President, they could have waited to sign. (Kuznetsov changed “signed” to “published” when interpreter translated this.)

I thanked him for these remarks and said I thought President would be glad to hear them.

Khrushchev said perhaps President would think he had concluded this agreement on purpose just to “put a little salt on his wounds.”

I said I believed President was a little surprised.

Khrushchev said, “and rightfully so,” adding that when Soviets do a silly thing they recognize it as such, but Americans donʼt.

I said I thought President had been very frank about a couple of matters at Vienna.

Khrushchev said that was right. Soviets were formulating agreement right now to send ten to fifteen fishing boats to Cuba. Cubans were having trouble with sugar cane harvest. In past, US had sent Cuba dried cod fish but had now stopped shipments. So Soviets had to help Cubans get fish to feed their people. There were no electronics involved, just plain fishing boats.

I said I took good note of his statement.

Khrushchev said there were other basic problems still confronting our two countries. One was nuclear-test-ban. We are now very close on this issue. Only problem is that of underground tests. Soviets didnʼt want these to continue since they were source of arms race. USSR is on even basis with US on underground testing. We should agree on proposals of English scientists. But President wants inspection, which Soviets will never accept. This is invention of American imperialists and monopolists. Soviets had arranged underground tests which US had detected and announced next day. So national means are clearly enough to detect underground tests.

I said I was familiar with (recent exchanges) on this subject, but wished to read to Chairman what I had written down after talking to President. (I then read applicable section instructions.) I said I might just add that we on our side, President, Secretary, Foster, and all concerned, had done our best to recognize their sensibilities and to reduce possibility they might view inspection as espionage. While unmanned seismic stations had greatly improved chances of detecting explosions or what seemed like explosions, there was nothing of which we knew that would replace a certain measure of inspection to determine whether certain events in particular were tests or natural events.

Khrushchev said statement by American scientists published two days ago admitted there were means to verify this.

I said I thought this was an inaccurate statement. We had looked at all possibilities and were convinced no means existed to determine nature of event. Fact that event has occurred can be determined, but inspection is needed to establish what kind of event it was. Number of cases in which inspection would be necessary would probably be infinitesimally small, but in those cases it would be necessary. Such inspection would also be helpful to USSR, since our scientists say there must be inspection to establish nature of event. I personally had no doubt that, if USSR said it would not test, then it would not. But there must be provision for objective observers to determine whether events were natural or not, or doubts would remain in rest of world.

Khrushchev said there were various points of view on that question and that is why there is no agreement. But Soviets had found out that there are means to determine nature of event without inspection. It was situation in Congress which prevented President from moving on this subject; he canʼt convince Congress to agree and consequently holds on to argument about inspection.

I said Congress represents public opinion. Difference between us is now so small, President hopes we can come to agreement. But agreement must be ratified by Congress and Congressional opinion represents US public opinion. We had made every effort to reduce this so it would not be a problem for Soviets and President really hopes for agreement.

Khrushchev asked for my evaluation of elections.

I said nobody quite knew how they would go. Normally, administration in power tends to lose some votes in off-year elections and this is not regarded by anyone as a disaster. Latest polls I had seen showed chances about even, but should be remembered that Democrats already have big majority in Congress.

Khrushchev said that was so, but they didnʼt support President.

I said they didnʼt always, but much of his program had gone through.

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.3722/10-1662. Secret; Priority; Eyes Only.

1 In Part III (telegram 978 from Moscow) Kohler reported the discussion on Cuba; see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XI, pp. 47-49. In Part V (telegram 981 from Moscow) Kohler summarized the discussion on Berlin; see ibid., vol. XV, pp. 359-362.

2 See Document 236.

3 Lewis L. Strauss, Men and Decisions, New York, 1962.

4 See Document 233.





252. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, October 16, 1962, 9 p.m.

982. Policy. Comment completing series on Khrushchev-Kohler talk today.

1. While Khrushchev slightly qualified his remarks on visit to USA, fact that he returned to subject twice on his own initiative, fact he already has agenda in mind, and manner of speaking made clear to both Davies and me that he has as of now made basic decision to make the trip.

2. I plan to see Kuznetzov next week to follow-up on some lesser matters of bilateral interest, at which time I shall express our interest in knowing as far in advance as possible development of Khrushchevʼs plans.

3. Khrushchev is thinner than I remember him from visit to USA. However, he had some color from his recent travels in the central Asian country-side and looked to be in good health. His speech was restrained even when he was voicing standard polemical anti-“imperialist” themes, and these were relieved by occasional banter or roguish expressions which seemed to assure I would not take his words too seriously.



Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.6111/10-1662. Secret; Priority. Eyes Only.





253. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, October 18, 1962, 5 p.m.

SUBJECT

Miscellaneous



PARTICIPANTS

US The President

The Secretary

Ambassador Thompson

Mr. Hillenbrand

Mr. Akalovsky





USSR Foreign Minister Gromyko1

Mr. Semenov

Ambassador Dobrynin

Mr. Sukhodrev





After a discussion on Germany and Berlin, Cuba, and the cessation of nuclear tests,2 Mr. Gromyko said that he wished, with the Presidentʼs permission, to make some observations on certain other points.

Continuing to read from his prepared text.

Mr. Gromyko stated that the Soviet Union continued to base its policy on the premise that differences in ideology were not a barrier to peaceful coexistence and peace. As Mr. Khrushchev had stated, Americans and the Soviet people were different from the standpoint of ideology; the US was capitalist, and the Soviet attitude toward capitalism was well-known. The USSR was socialist and it was building Communism. The question of who would win must not be resolved by force but by peaceful competition, and the Soviet Union had adhered to this principle ever since Leninʼs days. The Soviet Union was against the use of arms in resolving ideological differences. Competition in the economic field and in the satisfaction of spiritual and material needs of the people was a domain where the question of which system would gain the upper hand must be resolved. He said that he wished to reaffirm these views on behalf of the Soviet Government.

Toward the very end of the conversation, after having touched upon the possibility of Mr. Khrushchevʼs visiting the United States, Mr. Gromyko said he wished to thank the President for this opportunity of discussing with him questions of interest to our two states, since those questions related to very important aspects of the foreign policies of the US and USSR respectively. The Soviet Government had always believed that it would be a historical achievement if the US and the USSR found common language on these questions.

The President said he agreed with Mr. Gromykoʼs last point. As he had said in Vienna, the US was a large country, and the Soviet Union was also a large country. Both had many things to do at home. As to the outcome of the competition between the two systems, history would be the judge. The President emphasized that neither he nor Mr. Khrushchev must take actions leading to a confrontation of our two countries. He said that since he had assumed the office of President, the US had attempted to adjust US/USSR relations. Laos had been a success so far, but there had been no success with respect to Germany and West Berlin until now. What was inexplicable in the light of what he had thought to be Mr. Khrushchevʼs understanding of the United States was what now happened in Cuba since July. Since Laos, that particular situation had been the most serious one. Finally, the President asked Mr. Gromyko to convey to Mr. Khrushchev his appreciation of the opportunity Mr. Khrushchev had given Ambassador Kohler and other American visitors to meet with him and have discussions.

Mr. Gromyko concluded his conversation with the President asserting that the Soviet Unionʼs policy had been and still was aimed at strengthening peace and eliminating international differences, first and foremost the differences existing between the US and the USSR; Soviet policy was aimed at living in peace and friendship with the United States. This applied to Cuba as well; after all it was not the USSR that had invented this problem. It also applied to the question of a German peace treaty and the normalization of the West Berlin situation on the basis of such a treaty, as well as to other questions on which there was no common language between the US and the USSR. He said he would of course convey the Presidentʼs remarks to Mr. Khrushchev and that he was sure that Mr. Khrushchev would be happy to receive them.

The meeting ended at 7:20 p.m.



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series,USSR, Gromyko Talks. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved in the White House on October 23. The meeting was held at the White House.

1 Gromyko was in the United States to attend the U.N. General Assembly session.

2 In the discussion on Germany and Berlin, the President emphasized that the U.S. was anxious to work out mutually satisfactory procedures on Western access to Berlin. However, the greatest concern was Soviet insistence on the withdrawal of Western forces from the city. For text of the memorandum of conversation, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XV, pp. 370-376. On the subject of a nuclear test ban, Gromyko accused the U.S. of “seeking ways and means of continuing the build-up of nuclear weapons.” The President responded that the “US had sought a test ban agreement for a long time and it wished to end tests.” But “the problem today was a technical one, because there was no assurance that underground tests would not be carried out while the treaty was in force unless there was some means of verification.” For text of the memorandum of conversation, see ibid., vol. VII, pp. 589-592. For text of the memorandum of conversation on Cuba, see ibid., vol. XI, pp. 110-114. A memorandum to the President from Rusk containing talking points on all these topics is in the Department of State, Central File 033.6111/10-1762.





254. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, October 19, 1962.

The Khrushchev Succession

At age 68 Khrushchev is still in generally good health, but advancing years and the rigors of high office have begun to slow him down. The time may not be far distant when death or physical incapacitation removes him from the political scene. Almost inevitably direction of the nationʼs affairs will then be assumed by an interregnum “collective leadership” composed of the remaining members of the party presidium and secretariat. The Soviet system contains no built-in machinery for ensuring the orderly transfer of power; when the top leader goes, a power vacuum is created, and collectivity provides the facade of unity behind which the fight for the post of party first secretary is waged.

Like Lenin and Stalin, Khrushchev has made no attempt to devise a permanent solution to the succession problem; he has merely designated his favorite in advance. As early as 1959—in an interview with Averell Harriman—he revealed that he and Mikoyan had decided upon Frol Kozlov, now 54, as the man who would eventually succeed to power. Kozlovʼs status as heir apparent was first publicly acknowledged in the USSR last October; in the official listing of the party secretariat elected following the 22nd party congress, his name appeared second to that of Khrushchev and out of the customary alphabetical order, thus formalizing his position as second-in-command. What little is known about Kozlov suggests that he would adhere essentially to the Khrushchev line, but probably with increased emphasis on control rather than incentive.

Kozlovʼs designation as heir comes with no guarantees, however. It is not binding on his peers, and Khrushchev can always change his mind. More important, among the shrewd and ambitious men who make the inner circle of leaders, there is bound to be at least one who regards himself as better qualified and with a better chance of winning. Once another hat is tossed into the ring, the power struggle is on.

Emergence of the New Leader

Ultimately, the victory will go to that member of the hierarchy who succeeds in establishing personal domination over the Communist Party, the single cohesive political force in Soviet society. It tolerates no rivals, and no organization or group of any kind is permitted to exist outside its control. Thus, he who runs the party runs the country, without constitutional or other legal restraints.

However, since no single member of Khrushchevʼs coterie appears politically strong enough to step immediately into the dictatorʼs shoes, the new leader must establish a position of pre-eminence among his colleagues in the presidium and secretariat, and he must circumscribe and then reduce the influence of possible rivals in those bodies. In the process, it will not suffice for him to argue his own merits and to espouse policy positions to which his associates can accommodate. Very few of them can be expected to pledge their support without some kind of commitment in return.

Gaining the support of the members of the secretariat will be particularly important. Through the staff departments of the central committee, they control personnel appointments at all levels of the party and government. From the outset, the future dictator must seek to secure as many key positions as possible for members of his personal following and to see to it that no posts of consequence fall to his opponents.

Heads of other elements in the power structure will also have to be won over. For example, bearing in mind that the Soviet military high command sided with Khrushchev in his 1955 polemic with Malenkov—the advocate of increased consumersʼ goods production—the new leader will seek the support particularly of those marshals who are central committee members. In order to ensure that they do not become disenchanted and side with his opponents, he will be likely to advocate a strong military establishment and the high budgetary appropriations involved.

At the same time, he will identify himself with a high living stand-ard and will give vague promises of improvements in the welfare of the consumer. While he gives public indications of his intent to continue the “liberalization” begun under Khrushchev, he may be privately assuring the secret police that there will be no inroads on their powers and prerogatives.

Once he has engineered his “election” as party first secretary, the emergent new leader begins the task of transforming his leadership of the coalition into leadership of the Soviet Union.

For the most part he will accomplish the job by continuing to exercise leadership in the presidium. In the period immediately following his election as first secretary, he must consistently win a majority of that body to his point of view on policy positions. Success in the presidium would increasingly establish his authority in the lower party echelons. With the passage of time, the working level would, by and large, accept the fact of his predominance and fall into line behind him.

Role of Central Committee

The central committee normally has no life of its own except at its periodic plenary sessions, and these are usually devoted to speeches approving decisions made in advance by the top leaders. However, by basing his authority largely on control of a majority in the central committee and by using that control to defeat his opponents in 1957, Khrushchev in effect institutionalized the central committee as one of the principal bases of political strength. Its very real potential for intervening in power struggles makes it imperative that the would-be dictator build up support among its members as soon as possible.

To judge from the composition of the central party bodies elected by the 22nd congress, however, Khrushchevʼs lieutenants have had little success in maneuvering their allies into key slots. Very few of those elected for the first time have discernible ties to any of the current leaders. The only change was an increase in the number of members associated with the Leningrad party organization, which Kozlov headed for several years. Presumably these are men upon whom he can draw for support, but their number—along with the old Leningraders in the central committee—is still too small to give him a decisive advantage.

Kozlov clearly cannot now take steps toward achieving domination of the party without a green light from Khrushchev. The latter, who once boasted that he would run the party as long as he lived, shows no signs of allowing Kozlov to start building a personal political machine. Indeed the only top-level personnel shift since the congress apparently worked to Kozlovʼs disadvantage; the reasons for the removal of Ivan Spiridonov both from the central party secretariat and as Leningrad party boss last April have never become clear, but intentionally or not, his downfall very likely cost Kozlov a well-placed ally. The effect of the move—if any—on Kozlovʼs status as successor-designate is still not known but it must certainly have forced him to take a hard look at those presidium members who—both individually and as a body—will play vital roles in the succession. He must gauge their willingness to accept his claim on the first secretaryship, seek their support, and at the same time identify and assess the strength of those who might contend against him.

Kozlovʼs Peers

In all probability the four senior members of the hierarchy—Mikoyan, Brezhnev, Suslov, and Kosygin—will be the major voices in determining who steps into Khrushchevʼs shoes.

If past performance is any indication, First Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan will be primarily concerned with maintaining his present position in the hierarchy. Both his Armenian nationality and his age—he is 66—argue against an attempt to grab the top job. His activities will nevertheless bear close watching. He has survived nearly 30 years of purges and other crises in the leadership largely because of his ability to perceive the realities of Kremlin politics—as he did by lining up with Khrushchev against the anti-party group. Thus, any sign of a change in his attitude toward Kozlov would suggest that his political intuition is again at work, and could foreshadow a fight in which the advantage has shifted away from the successor-designate.

Brezhnev, the Soviet “president,” must be considered a potential candidate for the top job. Since 1938, he has been a regional party secretary in the Ukraine, high-ranking army political officer, party boss of Moldavia and Kazakhstan, chief of the navyʼs political directorate, and central party secretary for industrial, transport, military, and police affairs. This experience has very likely left him a long line of well-placed friends from whom he could ask political favors.

As a presidium member, Brezhnev has a direct voice in the formulation of Soviet policy, but his “election” as titular chief of state in May 1960—to replace Voroshilov—deprived him of the vantage point he enjoyed as a central committee secretary. The Soviet presidency is basically a sinecure and has traditionally proved a poor political springboard. In contrast to his predecessor, however, Brezhnev has brought some authority to the job and has used it mainly as a vehicle for expounding Moscowʼs foreign policy line. Contrary to frequent press speculation, there is little evidence to suggest that Mikhail Suslov is now or could become the rallying point for a “Stalinist” faction. A central party secretary since 1947—longer than Khrushchev himself—he has been concerned primarily with ideology and relations with foreign Communist parties. Since Stalinʼs death and particularly since the 20th party congress, he has concentrated on building a framework of Marxist-Leninist respectability around Khrushchevʼs policies, and he sided with Khrushchev against the anti-party (and pro-Stalin) group. To judge from his past performance Suslov does not measure up as a Stalinist diehard; on the other hand, he is not a simon-pure Khrushchev man, and on occasion the two may have disagreed over various aspects of Soviet policy. The future leader will very likely expect of Suslov the same service he now renders as doctrinal apologist for the regime. Like Mikoyan, Suslov has never evinced a desire for more power, and because he deals in political intangibles, he has not had these opportunities to cultivate a personal following normally available to a central committee secretary.

Of the senior presidium members, only First Deputy Premier Aleksey Kosygin would appear to have no chance of becoming party first secretary, but he is likely to occupy a high position in any post-Khrushchev administration. Kosygin is perhaps the top member of the Soviet managerial elite, and with the exception of the two years immediately after Stalinʼs death, has been a deputy premier continuously since 1940. He has never held a full-time job in the partyʼs apparatus, having come up through the administrative and planning departments of the economic bureaucracy. Since it is doubtful that Khrushchevʼs successor will be strong enough, at least in the early days, to take on both the party first secretaryship and the premiership, Kosygin might become head of the government when Khrushchev leaves the scene.

The Younger Leaders

There is always the possibility that a dark horse could emerge. Their brevity of service at the top would seem to militate against a power bid by Dmitry Polyansky, Gennady Voronov, or Andrey Kirilenko, the three newest members of the presidium. Yet each of them has considerable influence and prestige in his own right, and during the course of a prolonged succession crisis, one of them might be able to maneuver himself into a commanding power position. Of the four central committee secretaries who are not presidium members, Aleksandr Shelepin would seem best able to rise to the top. His long service as head of the Komsomol—the young Communist league—may have given him considerable influence among the younger party generation. However, perhaps to his disadvantage, he is tainted by past association with the Soviet secret police (KGB) which he headed from 1958 to 1961.

Shelepinʼs current duties apparently involve party supervision of the police and judicial apparatus as well as some responsibilities for industry, and his support will thus be invaluable to those who do contend. The future leader will need control of the KGB not only because of its coercive power, but also because of its unique ability to keep him informed of what is going on in the party, and particularly among possible rivals.

Shelepin and the other non-presidium secretaries may have been selected with one aspect of the succession problem in mind. The exact division of responsibilities in the secretariat has never become clear, but there is information to suggest that the new members are being groomed to replace some of the senior secretaries.

Leonid Ilichev and Boris Ponomarev are concerned with propaganda and agitation, ideology, and relations with foreign parties—fields in which Suslov and Kuusinen are primarily interested. Their apprenticeships would presumably ensure that, when the time comes, Suslovʼs or Kuusinenʼs duties could be passed to experienced understudies without any break in the continuity of party policies or methods of operation in these fields.

KHRUSHCHEVʼS COLLEAGUES

AGE AREA OF RESPONSIBILITY

Presidium Members Kozlov 54 Party 2nd Secretary The Successor-designate

Brezhnev 56 “President of the USSR” Senior Presidium members

Kosygin 58 1st Deputy Premier

Mikoyan 66 1st Deputy Premier

Suslov 59 Party Secretary

Podgorny 59 Ukranian Party Boss Influence limited by permanent residence in Kiev

Kirilenko 56 1st Deputy Chairman RSFSR Bureau Relative newcomers to the top leadership

Polyansky 44 RSFSR Premier

Voronov 51 1st Deputy Chairman RSFSR Bureau

Kuusinen 81 Party Secretary “Old Bolsheviks,” each nearing end of career

Shvernick 74 Chairman, Party Control Committee

Party Secretaries (not Presidium Members) Demichev 50 Moscow City Party Chief Junior leaders, possibly grooming to replace senior men. (areas of responsibility obviously incomplete)

Ilichev 56 Agitation amp; Propaganda

Ponomarev 57 Relations with Foreign Parties

Shelepin 44 Food Industry; Police amp; Legal Affairs

Similarly, the appointment last year of Zinovy Serdyuk as first deputy chief of the party control committee could signify that Shvernikʼs job is to be taken over by another of Khrushchevʼs old Ukrainian associates.

Such moves are perhaps indicative of a nagging concern over the future; they certainly appear to be an initial attempt to staff the next administration in advance and thereby help ensure continuation of Khrushchevʼs policies. But they fall short of solving the basic problem of the orderly transfer of the dictatorʼs powers, and Khrushchev has proved unwilling or unable to make any arrangements which guarantee that his authority will carry over to his chosen successor.

Conclusions

On balance, Khrushchev has evidently undertaken to see that his policies will be carried forward by staffing the top leadership with men who are in general agreement with his way of running the country. With the future—and Khrushchevʼs personal niche in history—thus probably regarded as partially provided for, the identity of the new first secretary loses some of its importance. Under these circumstances Khrushchev probably sees no compelling need to determine in advance the outcome of the power struggle which, it seems, must surely come.

This struggle, unlike the Stalin succession with its cleavages over basic policies, seems likely to center on personalities and methods of operation. There seems little likelihood of any radical alteration of present policies and programs. The probable composition of the new leadership itself would, for example, seem to argue for this conclusion.

In addition, the bulk of the partyʼs professional apparatus is similarly composed of Khrushchev men. From conviction and an instinct for self-preservation, they would probably throw their support to whoever seems most likely to continue along the Khrushchev line.



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Secret. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 1-6 of the Special Articles section of the issue. Photographs of Kosygin, Kozlov, Mikoyan, Brezhnev, and Suslov are not reproduced.





255. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, October 20, 1962, 7 p.m.

1023. Policy. At invitation Acting FonMin Kuznetzov, I and four Embassy officers had lunch at Spiridonovka with Kozlov and MFA officers present. Presumably invitation motivated in part by Soviet wish facilitate my establishing contact with Kozlov, since his only government position is that of Supreme Soviet Presidium member. For Soviet side, he dominated conversation.

During luncheon, discussion was rather general with frequent references on Kozlovʼs part to impressions he had gained in 1959 visit to United States including repeated references to US-USSR as two great powers which will decide fate of world.

Conversation after luncheon in which Kuznetzov, Smirnovsky and DCM participated included discussion of Berlin, disarmament, and nuclear-test cessation. In response my direct question why much-vaunted “coexistence” theory of Soviet Union is not applicable to Berlin, Kozlov, with assistant Kuznetzov, largely re-hashed old arguments about necessity of recognizing changed conditions, that post World War II agreements have outlived usefulness, that neither Soviet Union not Ulbricht threatens West Berliners, etc. Kozlov said that “speaking personally” (phrase which he used recurrently during conversation) Berlin was a relatively minor difficulty between our countries, that we should focus on the basic problem of disarmament and first of all cessation of nuclear tests. He pointed out that if resolution of these problems could be obtained, Berlin problem would have disappeared.

After expounding on the “most important problem” of disarmament, he quickly shifted into need for early resolution problem of cessation of nuclear tests. He graphically described effect on whole world of continuation of large-scale tests in atmosphere, under-water, and in cosmos, which he described as being 99.99 percent of the problem. Only subsequently, and with some prompting from Kuznetzov, did he get into the question of a moratorium on underground tests as part of the package of agreement on cessation of tests in other three atmospheres. Continued discussion of this question with his heavy emphasis on atmospheric, cosmic and underwater testing, with but slight reference to and in fact deprecating dangers of underground testing, left clear implication that as far as Kozlov concerned an agreement could be reached with something less than formal agreed moratorium on underground tests.

Throughout three-hour meeting Kozlov gave impression of great self-confidence and vigorous good health. At one point he referred to himself as the “political deputy” of Khrushchev. Foreign Ministry representatives, whom he inclined jokingly to deprecate, seemed somewhat ill at ease in his presence and somewhat concerned that he might fail to expound government line in questions discussed without deviation.1

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/10-2062. Secret; Priority.

1 Airgram A-720, November 20, elaborated on the summary transmitted here, providing specifics on the interaction of the Soviet officials, and concluding that “the atmosphere of the luncheon, while formal, was relaxed, primarily owing to the unbuttoned manner in which Kozlov conducted himself.” (Ibid., 611.61/11-2062)





256. Memorandum by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Politico-Military Affairsʼ Special Assistant (Garthoff)Source


Washington, October 29, 1962.

SUBJECT

Significance of the Soviet Backdown for Future US Policy



1. Short-Run Effects

Political—The short-run effects should be very favorable to the US. Unquestionably the US will emerge from this confrontation with increased prestige world-wide. The Soviet action should demonstrate once again the offensive nature of Soviet motivations more clearly than anything we could say. It should also demonstrate that the Soviets are not prepared to risk a decisive military showdown with the US over issues involving the extension of Soviet power. (We should be clear however that this is not to be confused with Soviet lack of willingness to “go to the mat” over an interest vital to Soviet security.) More specifically, short-run political effects should include the following: a. Soviet ability to penetrate Latin America should suffer a reversal, though a base for future penetration may remain in Cuba for some time. Soviet intentions have been unmasked, and Soviet inability to force its will clearly demonstrated. Our problems in assisting Latin America to achieve a higher state of political and economic development will still require all of our best efforts. However, our efforts should be focused on the fundamental nature of the problem, and it is important that we continue to pursue our Latin American country internal programs, along with our broader development programs.

b. NATO should be strengthened. The firmness of the US stand, and perhaps even more importantly the categorical refusal to barter NATO assets for immediate US security interests, should provide assurance of US commitment to the Alliance.

c. Our position on Berlin should be greatly strengthened. Our resolute willingness to act in Cuba should result in a complete reassessment by the Soviets as to how far they can safely push US will in general, including Berlin. Similarly it should provide our Allies with fortitude for meeting Soviet threats.

d. The effect upon the neutrals is more difficult to estimate, but in general is favorable. It must raise in the minds of many of the neutrals who may have a pro-Communist leaning a question as to how far they may safely “get in bed” with the Soviets and still protect their own national interests.

e. While there is probably very little immediate effect on Soviet Satellite relations, it cannot help but plant the seed of doubt as to Soviet omnipotence. This could have important implications for the future.

f. The effect on the USSR can be beneficial, but this will depend on how we further use our present strong position. It is conceivable that within the Soviet leadership the events of the past several days may be considered so serious a setback that changes may occur in the current Soviet leadership.





Military—The military benefits secured as a result of the Soviet backdown are similarly immense. Agreement not to proceed with additional missiles, and to dismantle existing missiles and launch facilities, cancels out the temporary increase in capability vis-a-vis the continued United States, which the Soviets achieved in their short-lived attempt to offset the current US nuclear strategic advantage [sic].

2. Long-Run Effects

Political—An analysis of long-run effects is of course more uncertain. Unquestionably the Soviet defeat will have its impact on Soviet thinking and policymaking. Over the long run, one effect may be to make the Soviets far more responsive to our efforts at finding peaceful solutions to the whole range of world problems. However, and this is an important qualification, this effect is certain to take a considerable period of time. We should not delude ourselves into believing that great and rapid changes will result in Soviet policy. People and governments simply do not and cannot change that quickly, even assuming the stimulus for doing so. Thus while it is useful to explore all avenues of solutions to world problems, such as disarmament, we must not expect quick or easy solutions. We would expect that the US will meet with the usual Soviet criticism, resistance, and negotiatory pressure. In short, we must not slip into euphoria over the successful cover of events, assuming it continues to develop favorably.

Military—Viewed in its long-run perspective, the Soviet backdown does not affect the Soviet military position in any important essential other than, of course, the important removal of the missiles from Cuba and awareness in Moscow of US refusal to permit any such venture. It is possible that the effect of these events might be to set in motion a redoubled Soviet effort to close the gap to development by the Soviets of a secure second strike capability.

3. General Conclusion

Our over-all preliminary conclusion may be summarized as follows: a. We have in the recent situation gained broad political and military assets, on which we should attempt to capitalize. We have probably gained important, but less definite, long-range benefits.

b. In these circumstances, it is vitally important that the US take the initiative in offering to negotiate on major issues between East and West. Without being bellicose in the basis of our new-found strength, nor on the other hand making concessions which would adversely affect our position of strength, we should press for fair but safeguarded solutions to outstanding problems.





If we have learned anything from this experience, it is that weakness, even only apparent weakness, invites Soviet transgression. At the same time, firmness in the last analysis will force the Soviets to back away from rash initiatives. We cannot now, nor can we in the future, accept Soviet protestations of “peaceful” coexistence at face value. The words may sound the same, but the meaning is different. Their willingness to cooperate in common endeavors can only be judged by performance. The difficult task for US policy in the future is to strike the correct fine balance between seeking cooperation from a forthcoming posture, while retaining the necessary strength and skepticism to insure ourselves and our friends against future duplicity.



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cuba, General. Secret. Attached to an October 29 memorandum from Robert W. Komer of the NSC Staff to Bundy, which stated that it was the best analysis of the Soviet backdown over Cuba that he had seen. Documentation on the Soviet removal of missiles from Cuba is in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XI.





257. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, October 30, 1962, 7 p.m.

1142. Deptel 1024.1 During call on Gromyko today, I raised question of faster communications between Embassy and Washington, pointing to experience of past week as good example of why it would be desirable for Embassy to have leased teletype wire running to Paris. I pointed out question had been hanging fire for year-and-half and reviewed recent conversations with Ministry on subject. I noted our understanding that it was technically possible have such link, since at least two Western press agencies in Moscow have leased wires, and pointed to line TASS has out of New York as well as SMUN line. I also referred to new legislation which would permit us offer Soviets possibility of radio on reciprocal basis. I said I was not raising radio question in formal way now, but wanted let Soviets know we have this possibility.

Gromyko said he was not in position to go into details on subject. He knew it was a question with a beard, which was now growing gray, but, not having known in advance I would raise it, he had not been able prepare self. He thought there were some technical difficulties. It was difficult for him to say anything about this now, except that he would “look into matter.”

Comment: Both what Gromyko said and way he said it did not encourage me to expect Soviets will give us leased line. In view fact MFA had been alerted to possibility I would raise subject with him (Embtel 1122)2 I would guess we shall have to find some means of exacting reciprocity on this issue. Gromyko did not react at all to suggestion on radio.

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 911.2161/10-3062. Confidential.

1 See footnote 2 below.

2 On October 29 Kohler reported that a conversation that day with a Foreign Ministry official had brought no resolution of the problem of delays in transmitting Embassy telegraphic traffic. In view of this Kohler reported that he would take the question up with Gromyko during his first call. (Telegram 1122; ibid., 911.2161/10-2962) In telegram 1024, October 29, the Department of State approved the approach and stated that it was prepared to make available immediately to the Soviet Government a leased commercial circuit. (Ibid.)





258. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Press Secretary (Salinger) to President KennedySource


Washington, October 31, 1962.

Following is a report of a conversation I had today with Yuri Zhukov, Foreign Editor of Pravda; Georgi Bolshikov, Editor of USSR Magazine; Mr. Boglov of Novosty.

Mr. Zhukov opened the conversation by saying that he would be most interested in my giving my observations of the past 10 days. I told Mr. Zhukov I would have to speak to him personally and with that proviso I gave him an historical review of US-Soviet relations since January 1961 during the Kennedy Administration.

I said the release of the RB-47 pilots by Chairman Khrushchev right after inauguration had been looked upon as a hopeful sign and could lead to the opening of Soviet-US relations. The Vienna meeting, while it produced an impasse on Berlin, had been significant for its agreement on Laos which both the President and the Chairman carried out following their meeting in Vienna. I said that I felt that the Laos agreement had been taken as an indication that the United States and the USSR could reach agreements and could be carried out; that they could strengthen the integrity of contacts between the two countries. I went on to say that in subsequent discussions on Berlin and nuclear testing, while they produced no satisfactory solutions, there was a feeling of integrity of communication and particularly private communication.

I then said I would like to review the Cuban situation. The developments of the Cuban situation were highlighted by the fact that in May 1962 when I met with Mr. Khrushchev1 there had been no discussion of this subject. They had become an issue following the start by the USSR of sending military materials to Cuba. This, I said, placed an immediate and heavy pressure on the President to do something about this situation. But, I said, the President had withstood this pressure and had made the September statement2 which clearly outlined what the United States considered to be the difference between “defensive” and “offensive” weapons. I said I was not interested in getting to a semantical discussion on this subject but that there was no question that the Presidentʼs speech should have served as an international warning as to what we considered to be dangerous to our national interest. I pointed out that the political pressure increased after the speech but that the President had still refused to be pushed into any precipitous action regarding Cuba. During this period, I pointed out, theTASS statement was put out in which it was stated that the Soviet Union has sufficient offensive weapons in its own territory so that it would not be required to put offensive weapons on any other land. I said we had received a number of private assurances that the Soviet Union would not place offensive weapons in Cuba. I said the President, in the face of political pressure, maintained his own position and even spoke out against those who urged a harsher policy against Cuba. I said the President was therefore astonished when the evidence was presented to him which showed that missiles had been placed in Cuba by the Soviet government. I said I did not need to review the events between 22 October to the present time because they were well known.

I said there should be no illusion however in anyoneʼs mind that we had not reached a point when we were on the brink of the deadliest of dangers. I said the situation now is very clear. The commitments made by Chairman Khrushchev should be carried out swiftly and demonstrably. It was not possible that the United States and the Soviet Union would allow Castro to prevent this. Anything short of swift and demonstrable dismantling of the missile sites in Cuba would let the situation slip back and I further said I didnʼt think that either the United States or the Soviet Union wanted that to happen.

Mr. Zhukov then reviewed the situation. He said he could not agree with me more when I said that the situation should not be allowed to slip back. At the Presidentʼs press conference tomorrow,3 he said, there should be no back-down on the Presidentʼs position on Cuba. He said if the President backed down on this matter, Khrushchev would be in a very difficult position. He said the President and Chairman Khrushchev were both in difficult positions. “It is most important to repeat again what has been agreed to,” he said. Zhukov said it is all very well for newsmen to get involved in details and interpretation but “the skill of the statesman is not to be involved in details.”

Zhukov then asked “how do we proceed from here? At Andover our American friends discussed the possibility of a Summit Meeting. Mr. Cousins4 talked to me and suggested several alternatives. I donʼt know if these statements represented any official view of the government but this is what Cousins suggested: (1) the possibility of a meeting of the Security Council attended only by heads of state; (2) a meeting between President Kennedy, Chairman Khrushchev, Castro, U Thant5 and a representative of the OAS.” Zhukov expressed the view that neither of these suggestions would be very effective. Zhukov said that Cousins then suggested a Kennedy-Khrushchev meeting followed by a meeting with Castro, U Thant and an OAS representative. Zhukov said he would like to know what our views were on this subject. Would such a meeting be helpful? What subjects could be discussed? “I do not exclude the possibility of such a meeting to finalize the present agreements.”

Mr. Zhukov said he thought the solution to the Cuban problem would open “the way for settlement of other wider ranging problems.” He said that yesterday he met with Scotty Reston,6 who said that he thought such a meeting would not be particularly useful at this time and would not yield results; that it might first be better to seek a solution through the Disarmament Committee or perhaps agreement of the NATO and Warsaw Pact groups.

I told Mr. Zhukov that I was not in a position to discuss with him our governmentʼs feeling on a Summit at this time; I had not had a chance to discuss it during the past week; that I could not tell him anything other than my personal feeling prior to the Cuban outbreak and that was that during discussions of Chairman Khrushchevʼs possible visit to the United Nations, I had gotten the feeling around Washington that such a meeting between the President and the Chairman would not be particularly useful at that time for it would put us in a difficult position if they were unable to come to any agreement. This, I pointed out, had been Mr. Khrushchevʼs own view when I talked with him in Moscow in May. Mr. Zhukov then dropped the subject of the United Nations and the agenda and said he would take it up with Ambassador Thompson who he was seeing next.

He made the following additional points: (1) He was concerned about reports circulated, he said, by the State Department that Castro had sent a message to Communists in Latin America to begin acts of sabotage. He said he was concerned about the implication that the blowing up of oil fields in Venezuela had resulted from such a message. He said he was certain that Castro had not sent out such a message and further he wanted to point out that Castro was not the boss of Communists in Latin America and would not give such orders. He said he feared that such talk would again start Latin American countries into taking such actions against Cuba. He said this would be very unfortunate: “the fate of the world is in question here.” He said “let U Thant settle these problems.” He said the solution of the Cuban problem must be “the test of sincerity of both sides.”

(2) Zhukov wanted to know if the President would find it useful to meet with Anastas Mikoyan. If so, Mikoyan could stop in Washington on his way to Havana.

(3) He complained bitterly about a movie called Weʼll Bury You released by Columbia Pictures. He said it was a terribly distorted view of Khrushchev and an insult to Lenin. He said that if the Soviet Union prepared such a film about President Kennedy the United States would pull its Ambassador out of Moscow. I pointed out to Zhukov that unlike the Soviet Union the United States Government does not control communications, i.e., films. He said he was aware of this but wanted to call it to my attention.

(4) Khrushchevʼs statements about Berlin and the United States elections7 did not mean that Mr. Khrushchev would sign an agreement with East Germany after the election. The Chairman, he said, does not have a desire to move on this problem unilaterally: “We do not want to solve this problem without your participation.” He said that what Mr. Khrushchev meant was that we should start active negotiations after the elections with a view of seeking an acceptable solution to the problem.





Pierre Salinger8



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/10-3162. Secret. Copies were sent to Bundy, Rusk, and Thompson.

1 See Document 195.

2 For text of the Presidentʼs September 4 statement on Cuba, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 369-370.

3 The President did not hold a press conference on November 1.

4 The Andover Conference of Soviet and American scientists and intellectuals, hosted by Phillip Mosely and Norman Cousins of the American Council on Foreign Relations, was held the last week of October. A memorandum of Moselyʼs telephone conversation with Ralph Jones (SES), October 29, about some of the activities of the conference is in Department of State, Central Files, 511.613/10-2962.

5 Acting Secretary General of the United Nations.

6 James B. Reston, chief Washington correspondent of The New York Times.

7 See Document 232.

8 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.





259. Memorandum From Carl Kaysen of the National Security Council to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source


Washington, October 31, 1962.

SUBJECT

Summits and All That



The only way to test the assumption that the events of the last week have created the potential for a major change in US-Soviet relations and consequently in the international political scene is to act on it. We can act in two directions—Berlin and disarmament. There is reason to believe that these are complementary not competing possibilities.

Discussions on both subjects have been going forward and there exist channels for continuing them; however, disarmament discussions have been languishing and Berlin discussions are almost dead. It seems reasonable as a first hypothesis to assume that in order for a useful initiative to be taken, it must be taken in a new channel. A bilateral summit directed at reaching agreements in principle on Berlin and disarmament, to be followed by foreign ministersʼ meetings of four powers would seem to be the best way to organize an initiative with a maximum chance of securing big results. The powers involved in the German negotiation include all those that would be required to deal with nuclear test-ban and non-diffusion agreements; if more on the disarmament front is attempted, a wider forum will be necessary. There are two kinds of counter arguments to be made against a bilateral summit. The first is that our allies do not like it. If we assess the probability of a useful outcome as being at all high, we are justified in ignoring this consideration. The other is that the internal turmoil in Moscow is such as to make it unlikely that the Soviets want a bilateral summit now. The assertion of fact upon which this argument rests is probably true; however, the conclusion does not follow. Indeed, it is precisely the existence of turmoil which makes the opportunity for a productive summit. Absent uncertainty and an ongoing prospect of re-evaluation on the Sovietsʼ side, it is unlikely that we would achieve any significant change in the terms on which we confront each other. Further, a Berlin summit properly arranged may indeed be a way of avoiding what must be a most difficult problem for the Soviets in entering into any negotiations at the moment—that of appearing to the rest of the world as bowing to U.S. demands. This argument points up in turn another condition of a successful summit, that we view our situation in relation to the Soviets as symmetrical; namely, that recent events have enabled us both to see with greater clarity where our joint interests lie and how it is in our joint interest to limit occasions of conflict and direct confrontation between us and to reduce the potentiality for any remaining occasions to escalate into general war.

On disarmament, the minimum results worthwhile aiming at appear to be a comprehensive test ban treaty, and a nuclear non-diffusion agreement. Some further trimmings could be added to this minimum in a way of an agreement to refrain from putting weapons into outer space and agreement on a list of measures to reduce the dangers of surprise attack. The former appear easy; the latter not particularly significant.

Khrushchevʼs recent letters to the President suggest that the events have themselves been enough to move the Soviets from their previous position on a comprehensive test ban treaty to an acceptance in principle of inspection, although this is not yet evident in Tsarapkinʼs1 statements at Geneva. It will be necessary to us, however, to take some risks with respect to the number of control posts and the number of inspections. This is a problem which we have examined fairly carefully, and we have the bases for decision on this.

On Berlin, our problems are more difficult. The course of events has probably caused the Soviets to abandon any plans they have for cutting off allied military access in a drastic way in the near future. If by the immediate threat in Berlin we mean the threat of a sharp enough interference with allied access to lead to a military confrontation, we can then say that the immediate threat has vanished for some (indefinite) time. If, however, we view the existence of even last Summerʼs degree of tension and uncertainty and the prospect that it might increase at any time as in themselves undesirable, then we can say that the Berlin crisis is still with us. Moreover, the pains in the present situation to the Berliners themselves and the importance of the German problem in intra-European politics, argue that the problem demands a major effort absent a Berlin crisis in the immediate sense.

The minimum results we might seek in Berlin would almost certainly require substantial movement by us from our past positions if we are to do more than ratify the status quo in the narrowest sense which we have failed to do in a year-and-a-half of effort. An international access authority with full control, ideally, of an autobahn, a railway line and a canal route, plus operation of the relevant airways, would be our access guarantee. In addition, we must ask for some provisions covering movement of persons, both between East and West Berlin, and East and West Germany. This might well take the form of minimum quotas which can be revised upwards by mutual agreement but not downwards, and with the right to reject specific individuals on the admitting authority of either side. Further, we should seek a clear contractual basis for the presence of western troops. It might be desirable to make West Berlin legally part of the Federal Republic, but subject to certain limitations on the kinds of armaments and the number of troops that can be put into it, on the basis of reciprocal engagements and conditions for East Berlin. This would be useful as a precedent for an arms control agreement. The case against this particular provision in the settlement is the traditional German fear that we would be contracting out of our responsibility for the defense of West Berlin. This is also in large part the case for it. On balance, my judgment leads me to be for it.

In order to achieve so much, what must we be prepared to give? At a minimum, enough recognition of the authorities in East Germany to accomplish some of the Soviet purposes. This would certainly include defining the borders of Germany to the east, as well as the sector borders. It would certainly include allowing the East German membership in the access authority. It would include that degree of recognition implied by East German bilateral negotiations with the Federal Republic on a variety of subjects. It could include an explicit declaration that Germany would be unified on the basis of discussion and agreement between the authorities of the two parts of Germany. If we add renunciation of the use of force to change the boundaries between the two, and mutual declarations of non-aggressive intent between the NATO and Warsaw Pact countries, we have the substance of the 10 points which we never succeeded in selling either to the Germans or to the Soviets last year.

The double package of Berlin and disarmament proposals might be negotiable on a bilateral basis. To test its negotiability, however, we would have to take the step of substituting a policy of informing our allies for a policy of consulting them in advance. It is not clear that the weekʼs experience has had a powerful enough effect on the principal ally concerned, the Federal Republic, to warrant the conclusion that we can achieve this result. But here again only the attempt can provide the test.

Having gone so far, it may be worthwhile to go much further. Much further in the Berlin direction would involve trading some kind of all-Berlin solution involving neutralization, with either four-power or UN troops and guarantee, for explicit recognition of East Germany and a German peace treaty. The treaty would provide for ultimate unification and contain the kinds of provisions described above for movement between the two Germanies and between each Germany and Berlin. To make this offer now would certainly offend the West Germany Government deeply. In my own judgment, the temperature of last weekʼs events was not sustained at a high enough level over a long enough period of time to make this proposal acceptable either to the Russians or the Germans. It might be made more acceptable to the Russians and less acceptable to the Germans by adding to it provisions limiting the number of troops in both Germanies and providing some troop-free zone for a short distance around Berlin and on either side of the boundary between East and West Germany. This would be very difficult for the West Germans to accept unless NATO integration went a great deal further than it has gone to date.

On disarmament it is obvious that the step beyond is a first-stage agreement of some sort. Here again the difference between the U.S. and Soviet positions is very substantial. Even if we are prepared to move a good deal in dismantling bases, and speeding up the rate of disarmament in the first stage, we would be very far from the Soviet position, which calls for something like nuclear parity by the end of the first stage. The experience of last week probably reinforces our judgment that we are not now ready for nuclear parity.

With disarmament, as with Berlin, the conclusion seems to be that a radical change is unlikely. Thus, the final question is: Is there enough in the limited program in two spheres to justify the risk of summit failure and alliance alienation? This writer votes “yes”, loudly. (Oxymoron?)

CK



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Staff Memoranda, Kaysen. Secret.

1 Semen K. Tsarapkin, Chief of the International Organizations Division, Soviet Foreign Ministry and Representative at the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee.





260. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, November 7, 1962, 10 p.m.

1227. Policy. Some footnotes to Kremlin reception.

1. There seems to me no doubt that events of past 10 days have really shaken Soviet leadership. This seemed clear from remarks by almost every Soviet with whom we spoke, including Kozlov, Madame Khrushchev, and Air Marshal (who told my wife he was now willing to believe in God), intelligentsia and government functionaries. This seems to me more important, basically, than rumors and speculation about differences within that leadership. There was in fact no evidence of such differences during three hours of reception tonight and Khrushchev was in command.

2. As the press will have reported in detail, Khrushchev made three short extemporaneous speeches concluding in toasts: First to Soviet people and building of communism; second to Soviet youth, i.e., the future; and third to “Ambassadors” and peace and friendship among all peoples. In latter he was both agile and restrained, following general line of Kosyginʼs report last night and Malinovskyʼs speech in Red Square this morning.1 Perhaps most striking element now being introduced is extension of definition of “peaceful coexistence” to include concept of the necessity of mutual “concessions” to prevent conflict.

3. During first round of exchanges with Khrushchev, in which all Chiefs of Mission were briefly received, I had recourse to a story which he had told in his own third speech, about two men who had added different numbers to reach same sum. I said that I used different numbers than he to come to same results as regards danger of situation and need to settle differences peacefully. He said total sum was important thing and proposed we toast that.

4. Later, Khrushchev called me over privately and immediately referred to our conversation about a meeting with the President.2 He said he had been thinking further about this question. He now thought we should not rush into such a meeting. It would probably be better that there should be advance preparation on one or more questions, so that agreement would be in view. Then perhaps the President and he could meet, maybe together with some other heads of government, and register such agreements. He asked me to convey his greetings to the President.

5. Despite the gesture toward Cuba in Khrushchevʼs last speech and toast, the Cuban Ambassador was in fact neglected during the proceedings.



During the entertainment which followed, Khrushchev pointedly brought my wife forward to join him and Madame Khrushchev. At the end he again asked me to transmit his message and his regards to the President, which I assured him I would do promptly.

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 761.00/11-762. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

1 For Kosyginʼs report, see Pravda or Izvestia, November 7, 1962; for Malinovskyʼs speech, see Pravda or Izvestia, November 8, 1962.

2 See Document 248.





261. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Board of National Estimates (Kent) to Director of Central Intelligence McConeSource


Washington, November 8, 1962.

SUBJECT

Soviet Foreign Policy in the Wake of the Cuban Crisis



1. The Cuban crisis is not yet fully resolved, and its further course may involve prolonged and severe tensions. This might lead the Soviets at some point to adopt a generally aggressive stance toward the US, which could affect their behavior on other East-West issues. Nevertheless, it now seems possible to gauge the general outlines of the policies which the USSR wishes to pursue in other matters of contention, especially on the questions of Berlin and disarmament, in the period immediately ahead.

2. The course of the crisis in Cuba has undoubtedly shaken the confidence of the Soviet leaders. They will feel obliged to reassess the validity of their own policies and judgments about their opponents. This process of reassessment will focus mainly on the general Soviet posture toward the West. But this in turn will be influenced by internal Soviet politics, which may already be in a state of division and confusion, and the status of Bloc relations, particularly the Sino-Soviet conflict which has been notably worsened by Soviet conduct in the Cuban crisis.

3. For the immediate future, however, extreme alterations of course in foreign policy seem unlikely. Retaliation is of course appealing, but the mood of the US, the coalescence of support behind the US, and the temper of the uncommitted world all argue strongly against it. There has been no evidence of a Soviet disposition to seek occasions for reprisals, and in fact the official Soviet position—that the outcome is a victory for theUSSR—puts a little additional weight against this response.

4. The chances for an early move toward genuine détente seem even lower. Soviet bargaining power is at a low ebb, and they would conclude that, when the West was under little pressure to make concessions, general settlements could only be at the expense of Soviet interests in such matters as Berlin and disarmament. They will almost certainly wish, as a general principle, to repair the present disarray and find means to restore an image of strength before they are ready to consider any real diplomatic give-and-take.

5. Thus the likeliest immediate outlook, in our view, is for a period of reconsolidation masked by verbal activity and propagandistic initiatives. There are opportunities for limited gains in this approach, insofar as theUSSR can play upon the war fears which heaved up during the crisis, and the general hopes that the superpowers will now have to find a more reasonable way to live with each other. The newly dramatized issue of foreign bases will evidently be employed in this connection. But in general we believe that the USSR will find this a poor time to alter its positions and a good time to talk for talkʼs sake, especially on such prime issues as disarmament and Berlin.



Disarmament

6. There is as yet no evidence to suggest any change in the Soviet position on general disarmament, and some reason to expect that none will soon occur. In the Cuban affair, the USSR has sought to avoid the principle of inspection and to insert in its place the principle of verification of completed disarmament measures, thereby staying in line with its stated position. The less the Soviets want to negotiate seriously, however, the more important they find it to pose as the champions of negotiations. Disarmament has always provided a ready forum for the agitational abuse of diplomacy, and now is a better time than most for reasons suggested above. The foreign base question, the concept of the nuclear-free zone, and an attack upon US surveillance policies all might be expected to find considerable resonance in the post-crisis period. The outlook is therefore for a considerable show of activity in this field which is unlikely, however, to include any substantial changes in Soviet positions.

7. A nuclear test ban, however, poses a more immediate problem for Soviet decision. There is some evidence that prior to the Cuban crisis and during it the Soviets saw this as an issue which could be resolved with minimum concessions. If the Soviet leaders feel that an early move to arrest the arms race and reduce tensions is now necessary, they may be prepared to give serious consideration to ending tests, either in agreement with the US or under a general moratorium.

8. Berlin. One of the most notable features of Soviet behavior during the Cuban crisis was the failure to exploit the Berlin problem in any way against the US. The Soviets evidently regarded the Cuban crisis as so dangerous in itself that any move to broaden the confrontation would bring intolerable risks. With the tensions over Cuba reduced the Soviets may believe that they can safely revive the Berlin issue. They may even be stimulated to do so by a sharpened appreciation of the importance of a predominance of power and tactical advantage in the immediate area of contention, these factors being in their favor at Berlin as they were in the US favor over Cuba. Moreover, Berlin would be the most meaningful area for Soviet action if the USSR is seeking a gain to offset its defeat in Cuba.

9. On the other hand, the Soviets must recognize that the US has a publicly established and much firmer commitment in Berlin than the USSR had in Cuba. Thus they are still confronted with the choice of risky unilateral actions and unattractive negotiations. They probably believe that unilateral encroachments would now be more dangerous because the US, having prevailed in Cuba, would be encouraged to take stronger countermeasures. At the same time, the alternative of negotiating for a mutually acceptable compromise is perhaps more difficult for the Soviets than before, because any important concessions would tend to confirm before the whole world that not only in Cuba, but in other questions as well, the Soviets were acting from weakness.

10. We believe that the Soviets are likely to reject these extreme alternatives, pending a general re-evaluation of both their own policies and the attitude of the West. Recent public and private statements by Soviet officials, including Kosyginʼs Bolshevik Anniversary address, suggest no major initiative on the Berlin issue is contemplated at present. As a temporary expedient the Soviets may submerge the Berlin question in the broader negotiations over a NATO-Warsaw Pact détente, thus obscuring and rationalizing their refusal to take decisive action. If they follow this line, the Soviets will probably not move toward an early agreement until the general line of their policies is determined.



The Longer Run

11. Although the immediate Soviet reaction to the Cuban affair may be an effort to gain time for rebuilding and consolidating, the Cuban crisis poses insistent questions about the future course of Soviet policy. And these questions have become sharper at the very time when economic problems are getting harder to solve and the Sino-Soviet breach widens. Moreover, this whole constellation of problems must be faced by a leadership which has experienced a serious reverse, and it is difficult to believe that this experience left undisturbed the structure of that leadership and the individual judgments of its members.

12. These considerations suggest that 1963 could be a year of unusual importance in the evolution of Soviet policy making. Arguments can be constructed for substantial and even fundamental changes, and while the arguments themselves point in different directions, each of them constitutes a stronger case than could be made a year ago. We should not expect a smooth and massive shift onto a new tack; contradictions seem much more likely. But the contradictions may well be more acute, the policy fluctuations wider, and the implications for the US more far-reaching than we have become accustomed to in the years of “peaceful coexistence.”



For the Board of National Estimates:

Sherman Kent



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Katzenbach Files: Lot 74 D 271, Cuba. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text.





262. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, November 9, 1962, 6 p.m.

SUBJECT

Communication to the Secretary from Lord Home



PARTICIPANTS

British Sir David Ormsby Gore





US The Secretary

Mr. Tyler

Mr. Cash





The Secretary began by saying that the US has no difficulty with paragraphs 1 through 7 of the communication from Lord Home.1 This is about how we see the situation. It would be a great mistake for any of us to draw general conclusions from the Cuban affair, and the British paper makes this very clear. We had overwhelming conventional capability in the Cuban area, and this is not true in other areas. The big question we must think about is what effect the Cuban crisis will have on Moscowʼs thinking. The Secretary said that before Cuba he had thought we were in for some bad months ahead. This had not been based on anything very precise. We would suppose that during the Spring the Soviets must have had a review of their policy. They had a lot of problems and had to decide whether they should embark on a period of rather inactive peaceful coexistence, or whether they should press hard. The decision was probably taken to follow the bolder line. We donʼt really know who drew guns on whom in the Kremlin during the Cuban crisis.

Sir David asked if the Secretary meant that the Soviets had decided to pursue a forward policy, and the missiles in Cuba were a part of this.

The Secretary said yes, the Soviets must have made their missile decision by the first of July. This was a major operation.

All of this may mean, the Secretary continued, that the Soviets will now go in for a crash program in building up their nuclear strength. Had the Cuban venture worked, it would have achieved some of this at a cheap price. But the Soviets may well now take a breather before their crash program. They might go in for a thoughtful reassessment, tidying up here and there, seeing what they can do, but not making too great an effort. Or they might decide that this is a more dangerous world than they had thought and consequently be more serious about disarmament and settling various questions. We just donʼt know what they will do, but it would be a great mistake to assume that they are routed. It is very important that the Chancellor not feel that now is the time to push the Soviets into a corner. We wonder how much margin Khrushchev has left. He may have used up a good deal of his political capital, and we should not try to “rub his nose in it” at this time. Whether the Soviets are going into a crash buildup or into a period of reflection, they might be more disposed toward a modus vivendi on Berlin along the lines of the “principles paper.”2 They might be interested in a pause—a further delay.

Sir David said there was some difference between an actual modus vivendi and a pause. A pause might not be too good for the West. The British prefer an actual modus vivendi.

The Secretary said he did not wish to exaggerate what would be changed by a Soviet crash buildup. They would have to have an almost unbelievable first-strike capability. The present situation almost passes rationality in terms of the damage both sides can inflict. The Cuban affair must have disturbed the Sovietsʼ thought that we are too sane to go to war. The predictors of US reaction in the Kremlin must be confused by this episode, and this may be all to the good.

At the moment, the Secretary continued, he did not see any Berlin settlement that would be acceptable to the West and that would appear to be acceptable to the Soviets. We ought to look hard to see if such a settlement might be worked out. The Germans may have some new ideas. But if Khrushchev has really passed a divide in Soviet policy and has won out in not really risking war, there may possibly be some chance of a settlement giving us what we need and leaving him free to sign his treaty.

Sir David said that the British paper dealt with the situation where the Soviets had raised the Berlin issue. The British wonder if there is anything we can now do to influence the Kremlin to make the right decision.

The Secretary said that we would like to find points where this is possible, and disarmament is high on the list. Cuba was basically a part of the arms race and an excellent example of what can happen if it goes on. We donʼt know whether we can get anywhere on nuclear testing. Maybe we can get somewhere if we can make on-site inspection invitational. We would have to be the judge of unreasonable refusal. We could not run any risk.

Sir David said a distinction should be made between a policy to encourage Khrushchev and the kind of policy that should be followed if it is discovered he has taken up the right option. Some of what is in the British paper assumes that Khrushchev will come to the decision to attempt real coexistence and might wish to reach a modus vivendi. The question is how we can save his face. This might be more easily done in the NATO-Warsaw Pact context.

The Secretary said that the US in the public exchanges on Cuba had used very general language concerning NATO-Warsaw Pact arrangements. One thing we can now expect is a lot of political and propaganda effort against foreign bases. We are in for a real battle on this. If Khrushchev is looking for a way to put Berlin on ice, this should not be too difficult. We could use the modus vivendi approach.

Sir David agreed but asked whether this should be done simply in the Berlin context.

The Secretary said the “principles paper” provides a much broader context. The US would be glad to have further Foreign Office thoughts on further revisions of the “principles paper.”

The Secretary said he wished to give Sir David the latest information on Cuba. The best judgment of the US is that the Soviets have made a real effort to remove the missiles, but we still have the problems of the bombers and on-site verification. It may be that Castro is the problem, but if the Soviets insist, he would have no other choice. Our problem is that we cannot settle just for the missiles. We must get the bombers out and have verification.

Sir David asked if this verification must continue forever or be for a limited time.

The Secretary said we must have assurance for a considerable period of time that this venture is not going to be repeated. Air surveillance can accomplish a certain amount. Perhaps the Brazilian proposal for an atom-free Latin America3 opens the way. One reason that verification is necessary is that if the deception is repeated, it will be hard to avoid war. We have the impression that Mikoyan is trying to get Castro to go along with the Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement.4

Sir David said that otherwise it would be hard to explain the length of time Mikoyan is spending in Havana.

The Secretary said we had had a report yesterday from a Soviet member of theUN Secretariat to the effect that the Soviets would take the bombers out of Cuba but would then embark on an intensive campaign against US bases everywhere. Our impression is that the Soviets wish to leave Berlin lying there. There is danger in thinking we have to rush to please Khrushchev.

Sir David said the question is whether there is now an opportunity to make Europe less explosive. We should look at the disarmament side. The messages exchanged indicated that we would. This could be kept separate from Berlin or Central Europe. Sir David said his impression was that the Secretary thought we should wait awhile.

The Secretary said “Yes.”

He said he had been giving further thought to convincing NATO that we must have available to us in a crisis the maximum range of possibilities. We must pay attention to our conventional forces. We must avoid having to make a choice between a nuclear response or capitulation.

The Secretary said he was also a little more impressed with the necessity of trying to create a pause in a crisis. This had been critical in the Cuban crisis. It had been felt that the Soviets had to be given a period of time in which to rectify their mistake.

Sir David said his impression was that London was wondering whether a broad East-West exchange should now take place into which Berlin would be subsumed. This might include surprise attack, war by miscalculation, nonproliferation, etc. Within this general exchange we might find that the Soviets were prepared to leave Berlin alone. The Soviets could say that all the other arrangements had lessened the dangers of war. Sir David asked whether this was a good approach—whether we should leave Berlin to stew for a while and turn to disarmament.

The Secretary said that this gets involved in the question of freezing the status quo. Unless the Soviets abandon their doctrine of world revolution, any NATO-Warsaw Pact nonaggression treaty would be very unilateral indeed. They would go ahead and do what they want, and we would be fixed. It would turn out to be a very lopsided arrangement. The Secretary added that he really didnʼt see yet that the Soviets were ready to abandon their theory of world revolution.

Sir David agreed but said they could practice this theory in two ways—play it long, or take risks.

The Secretary said he believed the Soviets were losing faith in the inevitable triumph of Communism, and this might make them turn to a more active program.

Sir David said they could play it either way.

The Secretary said there had been times in which he had thought Khrushchev might be appealed to as being the man who really built up Russia, but every so often he was reminded that Khrushchev was really an old Bolshevik. Cuba had set things back a long way.

Sir David said the British wondered how we could set about finding out what kind of a disarmament package might be possible. In view of the total lack of confidence on both sides, no one really believed in disarmament. Cuba makes strict verification and control necessary. It is probable that we can make progress only on collateral measures such as the test ban, nonproliferation, and perhaps outer space. The Soviets might be interested in this field. If so, how do we discover what they are interested in? It might be far more sensible to have a private US-USSR discussion.

The Secretary said this was possible, but it would be extremely uncomfortable for the US if our friends were sitting on the sidelines not giving us their confidence. In this connection he had in mind the Germans, the French, and others.

Sir David agreed. He added that he supposed the Secretary would be talking to the Germans about nonproliferation.

The Secretary said he would be talking to Schroeder about this. The German anxiety, he added, was not so much concerned with the Soviet Union but with their prestige vis-a-vis the British and the French.

Sir David said when it came to the test ban the Russians would not come forward unless there were some indication that the French were prepared to come along.

The Secretary said that outer space could be taken care of by a common US-USSR declaration.

Sir David said this might be an example of East-West agreement with verification on both sides.

The Secretary said if we could give the Soviets full knowledge of our information concerning them, they would be a little surprised. We could say that the Soviets could forget about their obsession with secrecy because we already know so much.

Sir David said we must remember the 1959 agreement of the Soviets to inspection.5 The wheel might turn again. The thing the Soviets probably fear most is Westerners bringing back stories about the level of the standard of living in the Soviet Union.

The Secretary said the Soviets may underestimate our knowledge and overestimate the value of secrecy.

Sir David said he took it that the Secretary was not too happy about sounding out the Russians as to the question of in what areas progress might be made concerning collateral measures.

The Secretary said this was certain to occur, but it was an uncomfortable position.

Sir David asked how the French might be brought in.

The Secretary said he didnʼt know whether there was any possibility of doing so.

Mr. Tyler said much would depend on the results of the French elections.

The Secretary said that personally he would think it might be advisable to have a NATO-Warsaw Pact military center where strange phenomena could be checked as to their meaning—movements of troops, radar blips, etc. This could not do any damage, and it might perhaps do some good.

Sir David said that the two big questions were: 1) what the Russians are interested in; and 2) how do we involve our most important allies.

The Secretary said that one thing the British could help with would be to find a way to make it clear to Europe that what the British would like to see is a special relationship between a united Europe and the US—not just between the UK and the US. This matter is much in the French, German and Italian minds. The whole sense of a special relationship is a very dangerous thing.

Sir David said this was one problem in the UK getting into the EEC.

The Secretary said at some time the American people were going to become very sensitive to the notion that we are the gendarmes of the universe, and that the scale of our commitment in Europe is disproportionate to Europeʼs commitment. This is something Europe can correct. It does not make sense for the US to provide both the nuclear and the conventional support.

Sir David said that he would like to go back to procedure on the disarmament side. If Kuznetsov goes on talking to Dean, will we have any clear idea of what the Soviets wish to raise? We should come to some conclusions as to who should talk to the Russians.

The Secretary said that we will get back to Geneva this month, and this would be the best place for this discussion.

Sir David asked if the US had thought of conducting discussions on some other level.

The Secretary replied that we do not wish to get much involved in other questions until Cuba is settled. But once Cuba is settled, we would wish to check with the Soviets on a number of things on which we might make headway. But the procedures would be the normal ones, Geneva on disarmament, possibly one or two more bilateral talks on Berlin, etc.

Sir David said the British were wondering if this were the right approach. They were wondering whether there should not perhaps be a high level US-USSR exchange to see in what areas progress could be made.

The Secretary said he was afraid that a certain untidiness in these soundings was inevitable. Otherwise we would have a terrible problem with our allies.

Sir David said there would be no problem with the British.

The Secretary said no, but there would be with the others, and we did not wish to raise these problems with our allies. He realized that this was not a good time for the British to take on General de Gaulle. Perhaps we could get the Germans to get the French to occupy some of the chairs they had left empty.

Turning back to Lord Homeʼs communication, the Secretary said he was very pleased to see that our general assessments of the post-Cuba situation were very similar.

Sir David said he took it that on Berlin the US would like more time.

The Secretary said that if London has more ideas concerning a NATO-Warsaw Pact arrangement, the US would like to hear them. If the fact is that we remain in Berlin, we could look at various theories as to how we might remain.

Sir David said he understood that at the moment the Secretary would not think we should press the Russians on Berlin if they were prepared to let it alone.

The Secretary said we must not rush to be nice to Khrushchev. He is really out to cut our throats, but on the other hand we donʼt want to push him into a corner.

Sir David said perhaps we had more time than the British paper indicated.

The Secretary said at the moment there were two very big gaps: 1) what would happen in the Mikoyan-Castro meetings; and 2) what would happen concerning the bombers. If these fall into place, other questions could be taken up. If it seems clear that the Soviets have performed and Castro stands in the way and we must, therefore, turn our attention to Castro, we are really going to need help in putting pressure on him. This does not mean shooting but maximum political and economic pressure, and if it comes to this we will need much assistance from our friends in this hemisphere and in NATO.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.41/11-962. Secret. Drafted by Frank Cash (EUR) and approved in S on November 14. The meeting was held in the Secretaryʼs office.

1 A copy of this undated communication is attached to a November 3 letter from Ormsby Gore to Rusk. (Ibid., Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204) In the first 7 paragraphs Home analyzed the situation following the Cuban crisis and in the last 4 he offered specific proposals on Berlin.

2 For text of the Principles Paper, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XV, pp. 69-71.

3 For text of the Brazilian proposal, first submitted on September 20, see U.N. doc. A/C.1/L-312.

4 For documentation on the Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement ending the Cuban crisis, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XI.

5 For text of the Soviet proposal on inspection, see U.N. doc. A/4078 (S/4145), Annex 12, January 5, 1959.





263. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Brubeck) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source


Washington, November 9, 1962.

SUBJECT

Post-Cuba Negotiation



1. The attached paper outlines possible subjects for post-Cuba negotiation with the USSR under two alternative headings.

2. Track A includes proposals largely staffed out within the US Government and generally familiar to our Allies and—in many cases—the USSR, some or all of which might form the subject of negotiation. (a) Bilateral co-operation: Signing of civil air agreement, implementation of Laos agreement, US-Soviet co-operation in the health field, agreement on limited measures to strengthen the UN, and joint space ventures.

(b) Arms control: Safeguards against miscalculation (direct communication facilities, exchange of military missions, advance notification of military movements, joint military-technical study group); Latin American and African atom-free zones; declarations not to station weapons of mass destruction in outer space; non-diffusion; partial or total test ban treaty.

(c) Berlin and Germany: A West Berlin modus vivendi including East German performance of access functions, Mixed Commissions to promote inter-German contacts, declarations re non-use of force to change German frontiers and demarcation line, non-aggression declarations.





3. Track B includes more radical proposals: (a) Expanded Berlin/Germany Proposal. This would involve an improved position for Berlin via either (i) an all-Berlin solution, or (ii) more secure non-Communist control of access to West Berlin and a change in juridical status of West Berlin which provides for continuation of the present Western military presence. For Germany, it would provide a stretch-out of the preunification phase of the Western Peace plan from the present 30 months to 7-10 years, which would be designed to secure Soviet acceptance of an improved Berlin arrangement.





4. The paper proposes a three-stage plan for execution. (a) Internal US decisions on which of these items we now intend to press.

(b) Consultation with our allies concerning these items, immediately afterward.

(c) US-Soviet informal discussion, to determine whether sufficient prospect of progress exists to go forward eventually to bilateral negotiation, possibly at the Summit.





5. The Secretary has authorized that this paper be forwarded to the President. However, he has not yet had an opportunity to review the paper.



William H. Brubeck1





Attachment2


NEGOTIATIONS

1. The Three Soviet Options. Broadly speaking, there are now three major options open to the Soviets: (a) To proceed at forced draft to try to close what they regard as the missile gap—or, more precisely, the imbalance in nuclear power—by accelerated programs for missile submarines, ICBMs, missile defense, weapons or platforms in space, etc.

(b) To continue current military programs and lines of foreign policy, with no radical changes, while they tidy up the worldwide mess they are in and sort out a new line of strategy and tactics, as after Stalinʼs death, in the light of their assessment of U.S. and free world strengths, vulnerabilities, and intentions.

(c) To assess the present crisis as demonstrating that the effort to extend Soviet power by nuclear weapons and nuclear blackmail has failed and to turn seriously to arms control and disarmament, and to more pacific means for the extension of Soviet influence.





The first or second option could be accompanied, on the diplomatic level, by no general negotiations; by pro forma negotiations; by limited agreements that create an atmosphere of détente, without fully committing the USSR to a particular long course; or by an effort during negotiations to project to the world that big movements forward were possible, without, in fact, concluding serious agreements.

Moreover, the Soviets will not necessarily make an immediate choice among these options. Should they, for example, have a preference for 1(c), they might still feel that it would be better to delay until the impact of the Cuban crisis had been dissipated, or even until they had succeeded in restoring their power image.

It is consequently important that the US not treat first Soviet responses as finally indicative of the path they are willing to follow. We should, as is proposed below, have in mind a full “negotiation scenario”, but should be flexible as to the timing of its inception.

Whichever alternative is chosen, the Soviets are likely to try to use a phase of negotiations to encourage the West to relax and, above all, to reduce its military outlays and alertness.



2. Broad Implications for U.S. Policy. The objective of U.S. policy should be to move the Soviets to conclude that their interests are best served by pursuing the course outlined under 1(c). The implications of this objective for our negotiating posture are discussed in this paper.

Nonetheless, the first requirement of U.S. (and Alliance) policy is to proceed on the assumption, until firm evidence justifies another view, that the Soviets may seek by other and more expensive moves to correct the nuclear imbalance which their Cuban adventure failed to achieve. U.S. intelligence alertness to, and an evident willingness to block or offset, such other Soviet moves to retrieve their nuclear position are required (i) for purposes of national security, (ii) to maintain the favorable nuclear backdrop to our current diplomacy, and (iii) to convince responsible men in Moscow over the longer pull that the only realistic course open to them is effectively inspected arms control and disarmament.

As between the second and third alternatives—a standstill or forward movement towards détente and arms control—only the test of serious negotiations (or a flat Soviet refusal to negotiate) can provide an answer.

To some degree, the choice made by Moscow will depend on our posture. The President has clearly signalled that we are prepared to negotiate seriously when the commitments made with respect to Cuba have been fully implemented. A continuance of that stance is one factor which will affect the Soviet choice. In addition, the choice will be affected by whether the U.S. and its allies show continued determination to develop their military strength; to maintain their unity on vital issues; and to move forward towards European unity and the Atlantic partnership—developments which the Soviets rank only below U.S. nuclear strength, in power terms.



3. Two U.S. Tracks. Should negotiations occur, we should be fully prepared, in terms of staff work, to move along either of two tracks: one relatively conservative, the other representing an effort to grapple more fundamentally with the major issues of international security.

4. Track A. This should consist of measures, already well staffed by ourselves, in many cases familiar to our allies—and some already explored with the USSR, which would range from a tidying up of the status quo to limited, but in some cases very significant, movement forward. Such items are listed below. More detailed negotiating positions covering these items are listed, where appropriate, in Appendix A.3



Bilateral US-Soviet Cooperation

(a) US-USSR Civil Air Agreement. Should only be signed as part of a larger settlement, since the disadvantages involved in acting on this proposal in isolation would outweigh the advantages.

(b) Laos. Action effectively to implement Geneva-Laos accord should be a prerequisite to broad US-Soviet progress.

(c) “War Against Disease”. Joint US-Soviet or WHO arrangements for combined attack on major health problems of common interest.

(d) Strengthening the UN. Agreement to the election of U Thant for a five-year term and possibly other measures to strengthen the UN.

(e) Joint Space Ventures. US-Soviet cooperation in certain outer space ventures. Movement along three lines agreed between Dryden and Blagonravov, June 1962.4



Arms Control

(a) Safeguards Against War by Miscalculation. Installation of direct communications facilities between national command centers in Washington and Moscow. Exchange of US and Soviet, or NATO and Warsaw Pact, military missions. Advance notification of military movements. Commission to study measures to reduce risk of war by miscalculation.

(b) Denuclearized Latin American Zone.5

(c) Denuclearized African Zone.6

(d) Non-Transfer of Nuclear Weapons. US and Soviet declarations not to transfer nuclear weapons and know-how to individual nations pending attempt to work out more general arrangements, with explicit proviso exempting true multilateral arrangements.

(e) Outer Space. Declaratory commitment not to station weapons of mass destruction in outer space.

(f) Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.

(g) Total Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. This would include effective inspection in the USSR for underground tests.

(h) Norstad Zone. Inspection of a limited European Zone against surprise attack.



A Modus Vivendi on Berlin

(a) Berlin. An exchange of “Solution C” type declarations which did not purport to be a final resolution of the Berlin question, accepting East German substitution under existing access procedures, with various fringe additions—UN presence, ban on atomic arms in Berlin, dilution of the Wall, etc.

(b) Germany. Mixed commissions to increase inter-German contacts.

(c) Borders. Declarations of non-use of force to change demarcation line and external frontiers, contingent on a satisfactory Berlin arrangement.

(d) Non-Aggression Declarations by NATO and Warsaw Pact powers, contingent on a satisfactory Berlin arrangement.



5. Track B. This should consist of more radical measures, designed more fundamentally to solve certain security problems in Europe and definitely to turn down the arms race. We need to staff out Track B, and to consult with our allies about at least its disarmament aspects, in order to be prepared to respond to any evidence that Khrushchev, for whatever reasons, might wish to deal constructively with such proposals. Such proposals are listed below, with more detailed negotiating positions on each in Appendix B:7 (a) Expanded Berlin/Germany Proposal. This would involve an improved position for Berlin via either (i) an all-Berlin solution, or (ii) more secure non-Communist control of access to West Berlin and a change in the juridical status of West Berlin which keeps present Western forces. For Germany, it would provide a stretchout of the Western Peace Plan from the present 2½ years to 7-10 years, possibly combined with some of the other Berlin/German arrangements suggested in Track A, to secure Soviet acceptance of an improved Berlin arrangement.

(b) Far-Reaching Disarmament. This would involve limitations on armaments short of general and complete disarmament.





If Khrushchev should move down a more radical track in respect of disarmament, he is almost certain to do so because he has now firmly decided that it is impossible to achieve a nuclear balance via the arms race, in the face of Western resources, without excessive economic burdens on the Soviet Union, including economic constraints on its foreign policy.

If he moves down the more radical track on Berlin/Germany, it might be because he believed that this would contribute to the reduction of armaments suggested above, or because he wished a reduction of tensions for other reasons (e.g., to avert an imminent crisis), or because his thinking had cleared sufficiently to enable him to appreciate that such a Berlin/Germany solution would be in his interest as well as ours.



6. The Position at the Bargaining Table. In looking forward to negotiations, it is important that we be clear about one point: With respect to Cuba and the offensive missiles, we mounted bargaining power—military and, to some extent, political—which was capable of producing a dramatic result. Aside from the new credibility of our military posture and the favorable military balance we command, we shall bring to the bargaining table on the issues listed below no such pressures and advantages as we enjoyed in the Caribbean. Whatever bargaining positions we may devise, we should be clear that Moscow will be under no great compulsion to accept formulae which are not evenly balanced as between our interests and theirs.

7. Basic Elements for a Negotiating Scenario.

Aside from decisions on the substance of the draft negotiating positions attached in Appendices A and B, there appear to be three steps required in moving towards negotiation. (a) An internal U.S. government decision to negotiate and to approve the concepts, agenda, and terms we intend to bring to the table. This is urgent business. Many—if not most—of the items listed under Track A do not require new US policy decisions. Track B would generally require new decisions.

(b) Consultation with Allies. We have handled the Cuban crisis on our own and, broadly, to the satisfaction of our allies; but we must evidently correct the notion that we intend to make unilateralism (or bilateralism with the USSR) a habit. Even if we should be pointed toward a meeting of the Big Two we must scrupulously consult in advance. On the other hand, it is our interest to maintain in diplomacy the unambiguous role of leadership we assumed in crisis. We should, therefore, discuss with our allies the possibilities on arms control and Berlin/Germany proposals in Track A, although the French reaction may be chilly.

(c) Explorations with the USSR. After consultation with allies and assuming agreement to negotiate, we must explore with the USSR our concept of how negotiations should proceed and establish a forum both for quiet bilateral discussion of the agenda and for preliminary negotiation to establish which, if any, issues are likely to prove negotiable.





Essentially, there are three possible points of initial contact and for subsequent preliminary negotiation: Moscow, New York, and Washington. On the whole, Washington represents the optimum locus, among other reasons because we have in the quadripartite Ambassadorial Group a ready instrument for quick consultation with our major allies.

If it emerges that there is likely to be some serious business to do at higher levels, the possibility of a Foreign Ministers meeting (either bilateral with the USSR, or of the four occupying powers of Germany if Berlin is involved) might be considered.

Or we might go to a summit; a decision on this point now would be premature.

Our general posture towards summitry should return to the post-Vienna formula: We are prepared for a summit meeting—bilateral or otherwise; but we do not believe that one should take place unless we are assured that both sides are tolerably clear, before the event, as to the purposes of a summit—whether it is for specific negotiations (in which case some prior assurance of significant forward movement would be necessary) or whether it is a general probing and atmospheric operation rather than a negotiation.

The purpose of a negotiating summit from our point of view would be threefold: to ratify agreements roughed out in advance; to permit the President to explore possible further avenues for negotiation in direct confrontations with Khrushchev; and to permit the test of negotiations at the highest level to help clarify basic Soviet intentions with respect to the three options presented on page 1 of this paper.

If such a negotiating summit were bilateral, some issues of bilateral concern to the US and USSR (e.g., safeguards against miscalculation) could be agreed and others of broader concern (e.g., Berlin and Germany) could only be discussed, and the US and Soviet Foreign Ministers then instructed to pursue the matter with the other parties directly concerned, i.e., in a Four Power forum.

It is altogether possible that the post-crisis period will unfold in such a way that the second and third aspects of the scenario cannot be cleanly separated; that is, explorations with our allies and with the USSR. Under these circumstances, it is peculiarly important that we establish soon a flexible and responsible instrument for steady consultation with our allies, so that we can keep in step and avoid any further imputation that we are proceeding from a direct bilateral military confrontation to a bilateral negotiation, in which Alliance interests are not adequately expressed. As noted above, the Ambassadorial Group in Washington appears the optimum candidate.





* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/11-962. Secret. Attached to a note from Brubeck to Rusk, November 9, which notes Ruskʼs approval to send it to the White House for the Presidentʼs weekend reading. Also attached to the source text is a memorandum from Rostow to Rusk, November 9, which states that it had been prepared by a group representing EUR, ACDA,FE, IO, L, G/PM, and S/P.

1 Printed from a copy that indicates Brubeck signed the original.

2 Secret.

3 Not printed.

4 See Document 202.

5 These would be handled in UN, outside US-Soviet negotiations. [Footnote in the source text.]

6 These would be handled in UN, outside US-Soviet negotiations. [Footnote in the source text.]

7 Not printed.





264. Airgram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, November 9, 1962.

A-660

SUBJECT

Soviet Information Policies



The Embassy recommends that the Department, in any appropriate discussions of outstanding problems with the Soviet Government which might follow satisfactory resolution of the Cuban missile problem, place Soviet information policy high on the agenda as the greatest single cause of misunderstanding between the two countries.

In calls on Soviet officials, I have made a practice of raising our concern over Soviet jamming of U.S. broadcasts, stating I find this the most shocking single reminder of the past in the Soviet Union. Some, although not all nor necessarily the most influential, Soviet officials are sensitive to criticism of jamming. Certainly many Soviet citizens resent jamming.

I have placed great emphasis in official conversations here on the Presidentʼs belief in effective communications with the Soviet Union as the cornerstone of our efforts to preserve peace. This means both private and public communications. As regards public communications, I think we are at the moment in a good tactical position to press for modification of the practically total censorship of U.S. foreign policy statements by the Soviet press, radio, and television. If the Soviet Government had earlier allowed wide dissemination of U.S. statements on Cuba (specifically, the Presidentʼs September statements), it could hardly have gotten itself—and the world—into the predicament it eventually found itself in.

It may be helpful to point to the fact that at the height of the tension during the first week of the Cuban crisis, the Soviet press finally published two statements by President Kennedy. This presentation of the other side of the question clearly aided the Soviet Government to explain its own actions. We should press for this kind of presentation. We do not object to criticism or press attacks on our position as long as our position is made known.

The Embassy is not sanguine that drastic modification of Soviet information policy is likely to be obtained. It is even more probable in the difficult period of stress and policy review which can be expected to take place here that Soviet information policy will be even more rigid. But the vivid examples of the need for better communications at all levels is there to be used, and the Embassy suggests it should be exploited in discussions of outstanding problems with the Soviets.

Foy D. Kohler

American Ambassador



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.3722/11-962. Confidential. Drafted by Eugene S. Staples, USIA, cleared in draft with Davies, and approved by McSweeney.





265. Memorandum of Conversation Between the Ambassador at Large (Bowles) and the Soviet Ambassador (Dobrynin)Source


Washington, November 15, 1962.

[Here follow 7 pages of discussion on the Cuban missile crisis.]

The conversation then switched abruptly to broader questions involving long-range US-USSR relations. I remarked that once we clear up the remaining elements of the Cuba controversy, it may fairly be said that both countries are moving towards a crossroads of great decisiveness. The next five years might either see a great and costly intensification of the present conflict or a conscientious effort by both sides to negotiate a genuine and lasting settlement.

Dobrynin said facetiously that although he agreed with my general view, he would like to stretch my five years to six years since this was the likely life of the Kennedy Administration, and who could tell what would follow it.

He then asked me to spell out more clearly what steps I felt were necessary to bring about this better relationship. I suggested four points: 1. The Soviet Union must become convinced that its attempts to spread communism throughout the world are no longer worth the efforts and the risks. The policy-makers in the USSR must understand that we Americans view international communism as an ideological instrument designed and directed by the Soviet Union to destroy us and all other independent peoples.

I suggested that this effort is doomed to failure not because the people of Asia, Africa, Latin America and Europe prefer a world run by America, but because people are committed to their own futures which are bound to be deeply diversified.

I remarked that I had just returned from Africa and I could assure him that no African wants to be Russianized, Americanized, Sinocized, or Anglicized; they want to become free, independent people in their own right.

In this respect, our task was much easier than the Sovietsʼ because we are striving to give people that opportunity, and we are sophisticated enough to realize that they are not necessarily going to become our devoted supporters in the process.

Indeed, if the Alliance for Progress succeeded, it was possible that Latin American nations would on occasion see the world situation quite differently than we simply because they had developed a greater sense of independence and self-confidence. If so, we would be quite satisfied since it would also mean they were now impervious to subversion from any outside source.



2. The US and the USSR must come to understand each otherʼs commitments and to help each other to disentangle ourselves from situations which are to no oneʼs advantage.

Under no circumstances, however, could the Soviets expect us to turn our backs on our allies, any more than we expect them to abandon theirs.



3. A nuclear test-ban and eventual arms control were vital. An intensification or even a continuation of the present arms race is not only costly to each of us, but also extremely dangerous.

Moreover, if this conflict continues indefinitely, important groups of people in both the USSR and the USA will develop increasing material and psychological stakes in maintaining the present political and military impasse indefinitely. This will mean that each government will gradually lose its ability to change the basic situation.



4. We must cooperate in stopping the spread of nuclear weapons to other powers. It would be particularly dangerous if China should secure nuclear weapons.

Dobrynin asked about Germany. I said that while we had no desire to see the West Germans develop a nuclear capacity, we carry major responsibility for their defense, and this can only be assured with a nuclear capacity in the hands of our troops.





Dobrynin added that many of his associates felt we have been encouraging the reactionary elements in Germany. I denied this, stressing that when Stalin armed the East Germans, we had to choose between a much more major U.S. force in Europe or arms for the West Germans.

Dobrynin asked if my views about a summit meeting between Kennedy and Khrushchev had changed. I stated that I saw nothing to change the situation since our last talk,1 when he and I had agreed that it would be a mistake to hold a summit meeting unless there were clear areas of agreement which we knew in advance could be isolated and announced.

I said that in addition to Cuba, which I hoped we could get out of the way soon, perhaps the most fruitful area for agreement would be in nuclear testing.

Dobrynin replied that while he agreed with my response in general, he would like to have us understand that Soviet concern about underground testing was genuine. The USSR, he said, does not have access to large underground caves, as does the United States, and the cost of preparing such caves is very expensive. In respect to weapons adapted to underground testing, he added frankly, the USSR is now behind and does not want to see its disadvantage further increased.

I suggested that at least we could announce agreement on atmosphere and under-water testing and possibly work out an agreement that would bring our scientists together for a stated period to work out an inspection system that would enable us to agree to a ban on underground testing. I emphasized that in making this suggestion I was speaking for myself, for in no sense was I an expert.

The conversation then switched to India. Dobrynin asked whether I felt the war between China and India was likely to become more serious. I suggested facetiously that he was in a better position to answer his own question since the petroleum products on which the Chinese were dependent must be coming largely from the USSR and, considering the long supply lines, the undertaking must be a major one.

Dobrynin soberly remarked that the Soviet Union is extremely worried about the conflict, that China was an “ally” and India a “good friend”, and that frankly this placed the USSR in a difficult position.

Although his government had not made any specific suggestions as to how the conflict could be settled (he did not know whether the McMahon Line was proper or not), he felt that every effort should be made to end the fighting since otherwise it could spread.

I then asked if Nehru had been correct in stating that the USSR was planning to carry out its commitment to ship MIG-21s to India. Dobrynin said that although he had had no recent word from his government, a commitment had been made and he assumed that it would be carried out. Nevertheless, it was embarrassing since it had been made under quite different circumstances, i.e. before the outbreak of serious fighting between the Chinese and the Indians.

I remarked that it would be my assumption that the Soviets would like to have some kind of truce within the next 30 days which would allow them to carry out their commitment to send the Indians MIGs, without arousing the ire of the Chinese. However, it was my feeling that the conflict would continue at least into next summer.

When Dobrynin asked why I dismissed the possibility of a quicker settlement, I pointed out that Indian public opinion had been greatly aroused, and even Nehru could not turn it off if he wanted to. Indeed, I could image only one way that a truce could become possible in the next few weeks: the willingness of the Chinese to back away completely from their present position, a willingness which could only be produced if the Soviets clamped down hard on Chinese petroleum supplies.

Failing this development, I suggested that the Indians would not be willing to accept a truce until they felt more confident of their ability to handle the Chinese militarily.

In closing, the conversation turned to Southeast Asia. I stated that I had talked that morning with Averell Harriman who was deeply concerned about the situation in Laos. Although, Souvanna Phouma was doing his best, the Pathet Lao were continuing to create difficulties. It was clear to everyone that the main source of trouble is in Hanoi. What could the USSR do to help settle this question?

Dobrynin replied that we could count on the willingness of the USSR to do its utmost in regard to Laos. Mr. Khrushchev felt that he had a specific commitment to President Kennedy in this area which he intended to carry out.

I suggested that the real trouble-makers in Southeast Asia were the Viet Minh. Was it not possible for the USSR to get better control of the situation either through supplies or through other means of dealing with the Hanoi government? As long as the Viet Minh continued to supply the Viet Cong there would be trouble in Vietnam, and we would have to stand our ground.

We could not allow the Viet Minh to upset the South Vietnam government, and we had the capacity to keep them from doing so. However, the sooner we could settle these problems, the fewer lives would be lost, and the less danger would exist of providing an opening for the Chinese.

As we walked towards the door, I again reminded Dobrynin that he must not assume that the views I expressed necessarily represented those of my government; that I had simply expressed my own frank thoughts in the hope that they might be helpful to him in understanding the way we looked at the present situation.

Throughout this two-hour freewheeling, give-and-take conversation, Dobrynin was relaxed and pleasant; he talked with a general air of frankness.



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR, Dobrynin Talks. Confidential.

1 See Document 246.





266. Memorandum of Conversations Between the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration (Halaby) and the First Deputy Chief of Aeroflot (Schetchikov)Source


Washington, November 15 and 17, 1962.

It was clear from the outset that the primary mission of General Schetchikovʼs trip to Washington was to reiterate the desire of the USSR to proceed with the signing of the bilateral air transport agreement negotiated in 1961 which would provide for establishment of regular air service between New York and Moscow by Aeroflot and PAA. At every opportunity, regardless of the audience, the General made the point that this was a desirable and worthwhile step which would be well received by the whole world, which was watching, as a sign of better relations between our two governments. This view reached its climax during the first discussion between General Schetchikov and Mr. Halaby on November 15 when he stated that he was authorized to sign this agreement on behalf of his government and felt that, unless this could be done, it appeared that the agreement should be scrapped as being too far off in the future to warrant its retention in a pending status. He concluded by requesting Mr. Halaby to obtain for him an official answer on the attitude of the U.S. Government in this regard.

Mr. Halaby pointed out that this was a matter involving other offices of our Government and that he foresaw difficulties in obtaining an official response to his question on such short notice, but that he would make an effort to do so before the time of his departure. The General thanked Mr. Halaby and stated that he would be willing to remain longer if there were prospects of a favorable response.

Mr. Halaby then conferred with the Secretary of State, Mr. Rusk, and with Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson, and received a prompt reply for transmittal to the Russian party. Accordingly, an appointment was arranged for 5:30 on Saturday, November 17, 1962. General Schetchikov arrived with Mr. Yarotski and with Mr. Victor Novash, Third Secretary of the Soviet Embassy, who had not participated in the previous meeting. Mr. Halaby advised General Schetchikov that, as promised, he had carried out the necessary consultations and the U.S. Government position had been determined, which he was authorized to give to General Schetchikov. Mr. Halaby pointed out that normally such inter-governmental matters would be taken up through their Foreign Minister with the Department of State, but since General Schetchikov had been authorized by his Government to sign the agreement, this special effort had been made to provide him an answer. That is: Because of all the unsettled matters between the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, it is still considered premature for the United States to sign this agreement. The United States Government would, however, keep this matter under continuous review and advise them through appropriate government channels of any change. General Schetchikov took this answer very calmly, said he regretted this was the answer but, if the U.S. changed its mind, to let them know and they would be ready to sign.

As a sidelight of the above exchanges, General Schetchikov made the statement on several occasions that it appeared to him one of the reasons we were apparently not ready to sign the agreement was the fact that we did not have a suitable aircraft to use on the New York-Moscow route, implying that our jets did not have sufficient range. During the discussions with the ATA, this matter arose again and we laid before General Schetchikov the performance figures of the Boeing 320B, which indicated a still air range of 4,000 NM with the design maximum payload of 53,600 lbs., and a range with full tanks of 7,000 NM with an 18,000 lbs. payload; therefore, he was misinformed on this point. Although this information is readily available from many sources, the General appeared to be somewhat surprised and unwilling to accept that this was an aircraft now in service. He finally concluded by saying, “Well, just as I expected, there is no technical reason for the agreementʼs not being consummated.”

NE Halaby



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.6194/11-2162. Secret. The source text was attached to a November 21 memorandum of transmittal from Halaby to Rusk. Schetchikov was in Washington to attend the Dulles International Airport dedication ceremonies.





267. Letter From the Ambassador at Large (Bowles) to the Ambassador at Large (Thompson)Source


Washington, November 19, 1962.

Dear Tommy: I came away from my conversation with Dobrynin on Thursday1 with renewed conviction that a struggle of decisive importance may be under way in the Kremlin.

I was struck in particular by the intense interest with which Dobrynin received my repeated comment that, with good management and a genuine desire in Moscow as well as in Washington, the time might be approaching when a breakthrough would be possible in the area of arms control; and that this, in turn, could lead to fruitful Soviet-American cooperation on a wide variety of fronts, particularly in Asia.

In reacting to my comments, Dobrynin seemed at times to be virtually pleading for some sign from us that would make Khrushchevʼs task easier in achieving such a breakthrough.

If, in fact, such possibilities are now being debated in the Kremlin, might it not be useful for us to provide the more moderate elements in the Soviet leadership with tangible, up-to-date evidence that we are prepared for some basic discussions once the Cuba crisis is behind us? And could this not be effectively achieved if the President, in answer to a question at tomorrowʼs press conference, were to refer to and quote from his UN speech of September 25, 1961?2

He would of course want to stress, as a prior condition for such discussion, that Mr. Khrushchev live up to his promises to liquidate the present Cuba impasse.

I am attaching a copy of the Presidentʼs UN speech; also a copy of the report of my conversation with Dobrynin.3

With my warmest regards,

Sincerely,

Chester Bowles4

Presidentʼs Special Representative



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/11-1962. Confidential. Drafted by Bowles. Copies were sent to Manning and Sorensen.

1 See Document 265.

2 For text of this speech, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 618-626.

3 Neither printed.

4 A note on the source text indicates it was signed in Bowlesʼ absence.





268. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, November 27, 1962, 2 p.m.

1362. I. During course my recent calls on high-ranking officials both in and outside MFA, Soviet side has sung chorus on theme of need for settling problems by “compromise” and mutual concessions”. Officials have invariably suggested time propitious to move ahead toward resolution outstanding problems, generally with specific reference disarmament and to Europe.

Similar line has been followed by East European diplomats. There has been little real evidence of just what this means in terms of Sovietsʼ intentions or even hopes. Elements which must be affecting current reconsideration of scenario, however, clearly include: 1. Effect of Cuban crisis on previous idea of Soviet leadership as to U.S. determination, firmness of Western alliances and support of Soviet people for adventures abroad.

2. Complications which denouement of crisis has introduced into already difficult intra-bloc conflict.

3. Obviously uncoordination ChiCom action on Indian border.

4. Domestic problems, notably question of optimum allocation of resources and shortage of foreign exchange.





II. Presumably, first concrete indications of genuineness of Soviet readiness to reach agreements would manifest themselves in nuclear test talks at Geneva and in disarmament negotiations where Soviets likely willing discuss and possibly even accept first step measures which could reduce likelihood surprise attack and war by miscalculations; there have been hints this might include very slight compromise on test inspection and revival of Soviet proposals of 1955 for reciprocal stationing military observers at chosen points in NATO-Warsaw Pact areas.

On Germany and Berlin, there have been only straws in wind, notably: 1. Relative restraint in Berlin itself and on autobahn.

2. Recision of military alert and readiness measures following Cuban crisis.

3. Aquiescence in press treatment and public statements, including speeches at East European conferences, notable as regards threat of separate peace treaty.

4. In contrast, increased stress on arrangements “regulating the relations between the NATO and Warsaw Pact countries”, starting with Khrushchevʼs published letters to President and then taken up by press.

5. Hints by Soviet officials of some let-up in Soviet insistence on troops question if change in status West Berlin could be achieved.

6. Indications Soviets have had little favorable reaction from uncommitted governments to separate peace treaty.





III. It seems possible to us, in light these rather flimsy indicators, that Soviet leadership may well be thinking along following lines: 1. Attempts to apply “consequences” of separate peace treaty too dangerous and gesture of having such document signed only by bloc and left unimplemented evidence more of weakness than of strength.

2. No package deal on Germany and Berlin now obtainable which does not leave impression Soviet set-back in at least tacitly giving blessing “occupation status” West Berlin and continued presence Western forces.

3. In circumstances, best bet for Soviets lies in conclusion non-aggression arrangements between NATO and Warsaw Pact, coupled with some related “surprise attack” and “nuclear non-diffusion” measures. This would be in keeping with present posture of Khrushchev as “man of peace”, improve atmosphere and possibly lead to some relaxation within NATO. At same time, this would inevitably enhance status Ulbricht regime and constitute at least tacit recognition GDR borders, thus giving impetus to Western publicʼs acceptance of division of Germany.





While change in status West Berlin desirable to Soviets also, this not essential at this stage. Status quo could be maintained as regards Western forces and access for time being, but Soviets would not be deprived of possibility subjecting West Berlin to current pressures and squeezes.

Obviously such approach would have its dangers for West, along with possible advantages in securing some blessing of status quo. In any case, we consider real enough as possibility to warrant careful study by Dept and then perhaps quadripartitely.

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/11-2762. Confidential. Repeated to Bonn, Berlin, Paris, and London.





269. Memorandum Prepared by the Central Intelligence AgencySource


Washington, November 29, 1962.

OCI No. 3606/62

SUBJECT

Soviet Policy in the Aftermath of the Cuban Crisis



1. The USSRʼs venture in Cuba has made a whole range of problems in both internal and foreign policy more difficult for the Soviet leaders to manage. Khrushchev gambled that he could score a dramatic victory over the US which he apparently believed would give him an important advantage in strategic confrontation with the US, probably including an early diplomatic showdown on Berlin and Germany. Soviet leaders must now be wrestling with the internal and foreign policy implications of their defeat.

2. Khrushchevʼs position as the leader of the CPSU and the Soviet government is not likely to be seriously weakened. However, Khrushchevʼs failure in Cuba, and the inevitable post-mortems that will follow it, will further diminish his ability unilaterally to shape future Soviet policies. The pattern of Soviet government as it has evolved since Stalinʼs death has made it increasingly necessary for its leader to cope with pressures generated by different political, social, and economic groups. The Cuban failure will tend to spur these groups to press their viewpoints more vigorously.

3. The Cuban venture will almost certainly cause the Soviet leaders to re-assess the perennially difficult problem of how to allocate the countryʼs resources to further Moscowʼs aims in its competition with the West. Cuba demonstrated that Soviet strategic power is not sufficient to deter the US from responding forcefully to protect its vital interests. This realization will sharpen the debate between proponents of a speed-up in the growth of Soviet military power and those who will argue that more resources must be allocated to the non-military components of the economy.

4. Soviet leaders will also be concerned with the serious effects of the Cuban affair on Moscowʼs leadership of the world Communist movement. Khrushchev moved quickly to forestall any adverse repercussions in Eastern Europe by calling Satellite leaders to Moscow during the crisis. Even so, their confidence in his judgment must have been shaken. Many Communist leaders in other parts of the world also look upon the Cuban affair as an ill-conceived Soviet adventure.

5. Finally, Moscow must deal with the intensification of its dispute with China which has accompanied the Cuban affair. The Soviet back down on Cuba has increased Khrushchevʼs vulnerability to charges by China and his other opponents in the Communist movement that his basic strategy of coexistence has failed again. Soviet leaders are no doubt debating this increased threat to Soviet hegemony over the Communist movement.



Basic Policy Considerations

6. We have no reason to believe that any foreseeable turn in Soviet policy will result in a decisive change in the nature of the contest between theUSSR and the US. The basic, long-range goals of the USSR have not changed; the self-interests of the USSR are the same after Cuba as they were before. For example, the USSR will be no more inclined now than it was before Cuba to give up its hegemony in Eastern Europe—and hence its control over East Germany.

7. In the years ahead, Soviet policy will continue to be shaped by the tensions and contradiction between two sets of interests and consideration: a. Impelling them towards establishing a more normal relationship with the West will be their image of themselves as the rulers of a great world power, their desire to gain US recognition of the USSRʼs claim to be accepted as an equal in world councils, their awareness of the consequences of nuclear war, and the needs of Soviet industry and science for greater access to Western technology.

b. Impelling them in the opposite direction will be Moscowʼs need to maintain leadership of a revolutionary movement with universal aspirations, and the fundamental problem of preserving, perpetuating, and justifying the exclusive role of a party machine whose claim to legitimacy rests on Marxism-Leninism—a creed which dictates a public posture of antagonism toward the “imperialist camp” and precludes any genuine or lasting accommodation of conflicting views and interests with the West.





8. These conflicting pressures and goals will continue to be manifested in wide fluctuations in Soviet relations with the free world. East-West competition on a global scale will inevitably produce further clashes and crisis situations, particularly in the Afro-Asian areas, and permit no more than temporary and shifting truces and accommodations on specific issues. Aside from these collisions inherent in the global contest, the pressures on Soviet policy stemming from Chinaʼs challenge and the growing instability in the whole structure of the world Communist movement would appear to rule out any possibility of a real détente with the West based on traditional Western conceptions of the proper rules of international relations.



Alternative Courses

9. We do not expect Moscow to resolve its problems quickly. While they are being debated over the next month or so, the USSR will pursue a temporizing and cautious course in international affairs. Their immediate concern will be to minimize the effects of the Cuban backdown and to avoid further setbacks, while at the same time seeking limited gains which can be represented as vindication for Moscowʼs current foreign policy. Clear signs of a major turn in Soviet foreign policy may not appear for some time.

10. The discussion we believe is now going on within the Soviet leadership, therefore, is over alternative means of achieving Moscowʼs basic goals. In theory, Khrushchev can opt either for (a) a hard militant line which would rest on the assumption that further major Soviet advances are not possible until Soviet military power catches or surpasses that of the US; or (b) a policy of limited agreements with the West designed to reduce international tensions and permit the USSR to devote more of its resources to competing with the West in the economic and political arenas.

11. An accelerated effort by the USSR to achieve a preponderance of military power over the US would have a number of far-reaching implications for Soviet domestic and foreign policy. It would require a sharp increase in allocations to heavy industry and in defense expenditures and an indefinite postponement in fulfilling promises to improve the lot of Soviet consumers. It probably would also mean at least a temporary suppression of certain “liberal” tendencies in some phases of Soviet cultural and political life which have been given cautious encouragement in recent years.

12. In embarking on such a policy, the Soviet leaders would presumably have decided that there was no point—until their relative power position had improved—in trying to get a favorable resolution of such long standing issues as Berlin, a nuclear test ban, and disarmament. On these issues, as well as on other points at issue with the West, their primary interest would be to maintain the status quo until they felt strong enough to adopt a more forward strategy.

13. In the field of intra-bloc relations, Moscow probably would hope that a policy of rapid development of advanced military capabilities would ease the problem of dealing with Peipingʼs challenge to Soviet leadership of the Communist movement and that a military stance toward the West would help disarm some of the most telling Chinese criticisms of Soviet policy.

14. Adoption of the alternative course would mean that the USSR had decided that it had a better chance of winning the contest with the West if it could allocate more of its resources to non-military ends. A paramount objective of this course, therefore, would be to reduce the pace and scope of the arms race. To do this, Moscow would attempt to create an international atmosphere which would make it more difficult for the West to maintain its present defense efforts.

15. This course would thus increase the incentive of the Soviet leaders to reach some agreement with the West which could be represented as demonstrating the success and validity of their policies. It would encourage Khrushchev to scale down his demands on certain key issues and increase his desire to reach at least a temporary understanding on Berlin. In the field of disarmament, this policy would lead the Soviets to give serious consideration to working out an early agreement on the cessation of nuclear tests because this would, in their view, carry an important symbolic significance to the world that a major advance had been made in bringing the arms race under control. The USSR, moreover, probably would be willing to seek agreement on other partial disarmament measures, such as an arrangement preventing the further diffusion of nuclear weapons, a NATO-Warsaw Pact non-aggression treaty, and possibly measures to reduce the danger of surprise attack.

16. On balance, and depending to a large extent on Western attitudes, we believe the USSR will lean toward the second alternative.

17. If the US should elect to pursue an assertive course directed at extracting further Soviet concessions on key issues, Khrushchev unquestionably would react strongly. He will be particularly sensitive to any signs that the US is trying to take advantage of his humiliation. He publicly warned last year that if the USSR should retreat from its commitments (in this case, a separate peace treaty with the GDR) the Western powers “would regard this as a strategic breakthrough and would widen the range of their demands at once.” He would interpret an increase in US pressure as an attempt to complicate his problems with the Chinese and would seek to reduce his vulnerability to Peiping by taking up a more defiant and militant stance toward the US. The general effect of an assertive and demanding US posture, in our view, would be to increase the likelihood that Khrushchev would decide that he had no alternative but to opt for the first course of action outlined above.

18. If the United States were to offer considerable concessions in hopes of inducing a Soviet turn toward reasonableness in international affairs, this would probably be misunderstood in Moscow. Rather than providing ready arguments for a hoped-for liberal element in the Soviet leadership, such an attitude would support those who believe that liberal democracies are essentially soft societies. They would probably then interpret our determination over Cuba as an aberration, as an essentially emotional response triggered perhaps by internal political considerations. The result of this misinterpretation of our motives would probably be a return of Soviet policy to a harder line in hopes of regrasping the initiative they have lost in international affairs.

19. If the US, however, should indicate readiness to proceed with negotiations on Berlin, a nuclear test ban, and disarmament on roughly the same terms that prevailed before the Cuban crisis, we believe Khrushchev would be encouraged to follow up his initial postcrisis feelers and move toward a resumption of Berlin negotiations. He realizes that the Cuban backdown has weakened his bargaining position and he probably would feel he must have a period of several months for rebuilding the USSRʼs position before undertaking serious negotiations. This requirement of a pause, however, would not preclude serious explorations on a nuclear test ban in the Geneva talks or informal discussions on Berlin.



Consequences for Sino-Soviet Relations

20. A movement of Soviet policy in the direction noted above could not help but exacerbate the already deeply serious Sino-Soviet dispute. The Chinese, in their attempts to prevent a Soviet accommodation with the West that would be at their expense, have now broken all but the most formal ties which previously united them and the USSR. Their efforts to exploit the failure of Khrushchevʼs Cuban policy, and what they have termed a “Soviet Munich,” have now driven the two parties so far apart that a further exacerbation, possibly in connection with the Sino-Indian border conflict, might lead to an open break.

21. The increasing virulence of the dispute has shattered the myth of monolithic unity which once provided a psychological boost to Communist claims of superiority, has stimulated the already sharp Soviet and Chinese competition for influence in the Communist movement, and has encouraged the growth of factionalism in many Communist parties. If the Soviet Union and China grow further apart ideologically and continue to pursue disparate foreign policies, the present trend toward diversity and polycentrism in the international Communist movement will become impossible to reverse. The atmosphere that will develop within the Communist world will be more and more conducive to the development of national Communist parties which will find it easier to sacrifice their international Communist aims for nationalist ones.

22. The deepest roots of the conflict lie in the contest for authority within the Communist world. For this reason, we believe that, except perhaps in some crisis which endangers vital interests, external pressures are unlikely to drive the USSR and China back together. In this situation Western policy can be a significant factor in determining the intensity of the division.

23. In the first place, the general success or failure encountered by Bloc foreign policies will influence the course of the dispute. If neither the Chinese nor the Soviets score notable gains, basic disagreements on how to advance the Communist cause will become more acute and the level of polemics will rise. These circumstances would assist the trend toward diversity throughout the movement.

24. In the second place, the Chinese are deeply suspicious that Soviet talk of “peaceful coexistence” in fact masks a desire to reach a real accommodation with the capitalist world, and probably at Peipingʼs expense. Thus the very fact of Soviet-American negotiations, especially if they are conducted in a spirit of compromise rather than maximum hostility, provoke Chinese calls for “all-out revolutionary struggle” and serve to exacerbate the dispute. In this connection, the Chinese are particularly sensitive to negotiations on nuclear topics—a test ban and a non-diffusion agreement—in which they perceive a Soviet effort to hamper their own nuclear program.

25. We believe that the continuation and, if possible, the exacerbation of the Sino-Soviet dispute is in the interests of the United States. It tends to diminish the prestige and fragment the power structure of the Communist world and—if the USSR adopts a moderate tactical line as we anticipate—increasingly drives Communist China into a strategic isolation damaging to its image as the revolutionary model for the underdeveloped nations of the world.





* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency. Secret.





270. Editorial Note


On November 29 and 30, 1962, Soviet First Deputy Chairman Anastas Mikoyan, who had been in Havana following the missile crisis, visited Washington. In a conversation on November 29 lasting over 3 hours, Mikoyan and President Kennedy discussed at length the Cuban situation and briefly Laos before turning to U.S.-U.S.S.R. relations. At this point:

“The President said that it is strange that there are two countries such as the Soviet Union and the United States which are powerful and wealthy, and which have no direct conflicts of interest to separate them. In spite of that, they find themselves perpetually in a state bordering on conflict. At the same time many other parts of the world are facing problems of hunger and underdevelopment. It would be good if the Soviet Union were to devote its efforts to the pursuit of its own interests, in the same way in which the United States devotes its efforts to the pursuit of its own interests, and abandon the belief that it is its job to kindle revolutionary fires all over the world. This would be worth more than 40 non-aggression treaties.

“Mr. Mikoyan said that revolutions are not caused by the Soviet Union. It is not the Soviet Union which was the cause of the Cuban revolution; as a matter of fact it knew much less about this revolution than did the United States. He already had said the same thing in January.

“The President said that he did not accuse the Soviet Union of having fomented the Cuban revolution.

“Mr. Mikoyan said that there will be revolutions regardless of what either the Soviet Union or the United States do.

“The President said that this may be true, but that it was still important for the two countries to understand each other better. How could the Soviet Government believe that the United States would not react on finding that there were 40 missiles emplaced in Cuba? How would the Soviets have reacted if the United States had emplaced 40 missiles in Finland, especially if the government of that country had been as inimical to the Soviet Union as Castro is towards the United States?

“Mr. Mikoyan said that there are United States missiles in Turkey very close to the Soviet Union. In spite of that he feels that Soviet citizens may sleep with tranquility, as long as the missiles in question are in American hands. This is because he trusts President Kennedy.

“The President said that he has always been of the opinion that American missile bases such as those in Turkey do not make sense. Several have been deactivated and for the last twenty months the United States Government has worked at deactivating more. This is why the emplacing of Soviet missiles in Cuba has come as such a shock.

“It is quite clear that the two governments have misjudged one another. This is a type of misjudgment which neither they nor the world can afford.

“Mr. Mikoyan said that he liked the spirit of what the President just said. That is why it is necessary to talk problems over and to agree.

“The President said that it was not enough to obtain verbal agreements. They also must be implemented. It would be better perhaps if—as in the case of Laos—the Soviet Union would not always insist that it is fulfilling its obligations. It would be better if it were ready to admit its shortcomings as the United States is ready to admit its own shortcomings, and work harder to correct them.

“Mr. Mikoyan said that problems had to be taken up one by one.

“The President said that in doing so it must be remembered that the two countries have very few genuinely divergent interests, and yet there are many conflicts between them. There is something very wrong with such a situation.” (Memorandum of conversation; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR, Mikoyan Talks. For text of the memoranda of conversation on Cuba, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XI, pages 545-565.)

The following day Mikoyan and Secretary of State Rusk, in a meeting lasting over 2# hours, discussed Berlin, a Latin American atom-free-zone, a nuclear test ban, surprise attacks, and a NATO-Warsaw non-aggression pact. For text of the memorandum of discussion on Berlin, see ibid., volume XV, pages 449-452. Memoranda of the conversations on the next three topics are scheduled for the microfiche supplement to volume VII. With regard to the non-aggression pact:

“Mr. Mikoyan said he wanted to raise one more question. During the conversation with the President at the White House last night, the Cuban question had taken up so much time there had been no chance for a thorough discussion of the question of a NATO-Warsaw non-aggression pact. The President himself had raised the question. Why do we not proceed to conclude such a pact? Mr. Mikoyan observed he could inform Chairman Khrushchev about this upon his return to Moscow. He asked if the American side was in a position to give him an answer. It would be good if he could receive a definite answer, and perhaps it might be possible tonight. He would be seeing Attorney General Kennedy at supper with the Udalls.

“The Secretary remarked it was true that we have an interest in finding a way to reduce the dangers of confrontation between the NATO and Warsaw Pact countries. He had discussed this question in general terms with Gromyko during the past year. However, it was a problem related to timing to other issues. The United States has not been delegated authority by the other countries to negotiate a pact on their behalf. Nevertheless, we were prepared to discuss the idea informally; the basis for a pact and the circumstances in which such an agreement might be possible.” (Memorandum of conversation; Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/11-3062)





271. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, December 7, 1962.

Soviet Foreign Policy Developments

Now that the Cuban crisis, in Moscowʼs view, has been liquidated for all practical purposes, Khrushchev is turning his attention to rebuilding his bargaining power for an eventual resumption of Berlin negotiations. He told the Canadian ambassador on 28 November that a new round of talks should begin soon, and gave the impression that he meant within the next few months.

Khrushchevʼs exposition of his Berlin position to the Canadian ambassador—and to Lord Home, through Soviet Ambassador Soldatov in London, on the same day—probably reflected the general line the Soviet premier had planned to take in a personal appearance before the UN General Assembly last month if the Cuban crisis had not intervened. In these conversations, and in a letter to Prime Minister Macmillan on 28 November,1 Khrushchev characterized Berlin and Germany as the most important questions requiring “urgent solution.”

Ambassador Soldatov tried to present Soviet Berlin proposals in the most reasonable terms, stressing the “great concessions” the USSR and East Germany had already made. He repeated the line Khrushchev had taken with British Ambassador Roberts on 12 November that a certain degree of understanding on such questions as German frontiers and respect for East German sovereignty had been reached in talks between the USSR and the US and Britain, and that the only remaining issue is the question of Western forces in West Berlin.

Soldatov recalled that Khrushchev had told the British ambassador that Moscow was ready to agree that the “old occupation flag—which in fact serves as a screen for NATO—should be replaced by the UN flag.” He proposed that the Western forces should be replaced by a “UN police unit” for a fixed period of time. This “police unit” should be composed of the Western garrisons, plus contingents from other unspecified UN members. It should not exceed the combined strength of the Western garrisons as of 1 July 1962, and would be reduced at a fixed annual rate until the “unit” is withdrawn altogether at the end of four years, leaving West Berlin under the protection of UN “obligations.”

Soldatov also renewed earlier Soviet suggestions that the UN headquarters should be transferred to West Berlin. Khrushchev also made this proposal to the Canadian ambassador, claiming that the “whole world” would then be the guarantor of West Berlinʼs freedom.

In contrast to the generally conciliatory approach to the British, Khrushchev adopted a stronger tone in his talk with the Canadian ambassador. He warned that failure to reach a Berlin agreement would create a “very dangerous situation” which could get out of hand, and he revived the threat of a separate peace treaty with East Germany. He emphasized that “Berlin is not Cuba” and that it would be “dangerous madness” to expect a further Soviet retreat.

Khrushchev warned that the USSRʼs local tactical and strategic position is vastly stronger in Berlin than it was in Cuba, and that “if people think the Cuban affair will restrain us, they donʼt know us.” He reiterated that after a separate treaty is signed, the USSR could and would cut Allied military access to West Berlin. He added, however, that he would not repeat “Stalinʼs stupid mistake” in imposing a blockade on civilian traffic.

In his talk with the Canadian ambassador, Khrushchev advanced stronger terms for a Berlin settlement than Ambassador Soldatov outlined to Lord Home.

Khrushchev said he “knew” that British Ambassador Roberts in their 12 November talk had received the impression that the USSR would accept the continued presence of Western forces in West Berlin, without the addition of Soviet troops, provided they were under UN aegis rather than the existing occupation status. He denied categorically that he had said this and insisted he would agree only to one of four variants: (1) the addition of Soviet troops to the Western garrisons; (2) replacement of the Western forces by contingents of smaller NATO and Warsaw Pact countries; (3) contingents from neutral powers; (4) a combination of (2) and (3).

In reporting this interview to his government, the Canadian ambassador commented that he could not believe that Ambassador Roberts had misunderstood Khrushchev. Although Soldatovʼs definition of Soviet terms to Lord Home went beyond Khrushchevʼs 12 November views, Soldatov did not use this occasion to “correct” Ambassador Robertsʼ alleged misunderstanding.

Khrushchev had told Roberts that the actual composition of the forces under the UN flag need not be a subject for dispute. He implied that the USSR would not object to the continued presence of Western forces provided an agreement is reached to place them under UN authority. Khrushchev at that time did not insist on adding Soviet troops to the Western garrisons and did not mention the other “variants.”

The Canadian ambassador also pointed out that Soviet officials have long tried to create or widen a wedge between Canada and the US and to encourage a neutralist attitude in Canada. Khrushchevʼs more demanding line probably was aimed at prodding Canada into urging both the US and Britain to take a more forthcoming position in the next round of Berlin negotiations.

Stress on Soviet Missile Lead

Khrushchevʼs preoccupation with strengthening his post-Cuba bargaining position was also reflected in his remarks to the Canadian ambassador and in renewed claims in the Soviet press of the USSRʼs superiority in long-range strategic weapons. Khrushchevʼs sensitivity to the damaging effect of his backdown in Cuba was evident in his statement to the ambassador that it was not a matter of much importance where Soviet rockets are located. He contended that withdrawal of strategic missiles from Cuba did not seriously affect the USSRʼs over-all capabilities and that the USSR has plenty of ICBMs and submarines which could fire Polaris-type missiles against the US.

A Red Star article on 4 December by Marshal Biryuzov, commander in chief of the Soviet rocket forces, claimed that the USSR “still confidently leads the US in the creation and development of powerful rockets.” He boasted that the Soviet Union is “perfecting” nuclear warheads, with yields of “50 to 60 and more megatons,” which can be delivered to any point on the globe, and that the USSR has “successfully solved” the problem of destroying enemy rockets in flight. Izvestia also carried an article on 1 December by Chief Marshal of Artillery Varentsov which stressed the “absolute reliability and high precision” of Soviet missiles which make them “far superior” to American missiles.

Berlin

Although Moscow apparently does not plan to intensify pressure on Berlin in the near future, it continues to seize any opportunity to keep the issue alive.

The Soviets sent notes to the Western powers on 29 November2 protesting a West German action in bringing suit against an alleged Communist-front organization before the Federal Administrative Court in West Berlin.

Moscow pointed out that the Western governments agree that West Berlin is not part of the Federal Republic and charged that West German authorities were illegally interfering in West Berlin affairs. Although the notes contended that this incident underscores the “urgent necessity” of a German peace settlement, they made no mention of a separate peace treaty.

In his first public statement on Berlin and Germany since the Cuban crisis, East German leader Ulbricht also omitted all references to a peace treaty and echoed Moscowʼs line that “dangerous disputes” must be settled through compromise. In a 2 December speech to an East German party district conference, Ulbricht adopted a moderate position and placed the peace treaty question in the framework of a general East German “long-term policy.” He expressed optimism that the formation of a new government in Bonn may lead to negotiations and an eventual normalization of relations between the two German states.

Disarmament

In his talk with the Canadian ambassador, Khrushchev reiterated his earlier position that no real progress could be expected on disarmament prior to a Berlin settlement. TheUSSR, however, continued to take a hopeful view of prospects for a nuclear test ban agreement.

In his 28 November letter to Prime Minister Macmillan, Khrushchev repeated the proposal which the USSR first outlined to the US on 7 November for using unmanned, automatic seismic stations to police a nuclear test ban. Although the Soviet premier again rejected on-site inspections regardless of the number, he suggested that these seismic stations, with “elements” of international control, would provide a basis for a “mutually acceptable compromise.” He repeated the offer to install two or three “black boxes” in the USSR and listed three areas “most prone to earthquakes” as possible sites.

Apparently judging that the British position on test-ban controls is actually closer to the Soviet than to the US stand, Khrushchev probably hoped by this line to encourage Macmillan to urge the US to relax or abandon its insistence on on-site inspections in the USSR.

At Geneva, Soviet delegate Tsarapkin continued to stress the “favorable conditions” for a test ban agreement. He claimed that the “black boxes” would enhance the efficiency of existing national detection systems. Tsarapkin privately acknowledged that this scheme was designed to compensate the US for the absence of on-site inspections. However, he took the usual position in a private discussion with Ambassador Dean that “agreement in principle” on the use of the seismic stations should be reached before the technical details are discussed.

The USSR maintained its insistence on a comprehensive ban on all testing. Tsarapkin rejected a Swedish proposal for an interim agreement to stop underground tests, contending this would only legalize such tests and give the US a military advantage.

Cuba

TASS reported without comment the US announcement that the IL-28 jet light bombers are being withdrawn from Cuba. Following Mikoyanʼs talks with President Kennedy and other US leaders, Soviet propaganda demands for a formal US noninvasion pledge declined sharply. Mikoyan characterized his talks as having been useful in clarifying respective positions on Cuba, Berlin, and other questions. He said the meetings left the impression that a “possibility is in the offing for bringing the viewpoints of the two sides closer on a number of important international questions.” He agreed to further talks in New York to work out a Cuban settlement and said “we expect progress in these talks.”

In his speech to the Italian Communist Party congress on 3 December, Kozlov developed Moscowʼs apologia for Khrushchevʼs handling of the Cuban crisis. He claimed that Moscowʼs “decisive and far-sighted actions” had prevented an attack on Cuba and preserved world peace. He promised that the USSR would continue to help “revolutionary Cuba to defend its independence.”

Khrushchevʼs letter to Macmillan stated that the Cuban issue still retains “top priority” and claimed that the USSR has fulfilled its understanding with President Kennedy. He noted that the US has lifted the naval quarantine but said final settlement must include a formal US noninvasion pledge.

[Here follow sections on the Sino-Indian border dispute, Sino-Soviet dispute, and Bloc-Yugoslav relations.]



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Top Secret; [codeword not declassified]; No Foreign Dissemination; Background Use Only. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 4-7 of the Weekly Review section of the issue.

1 Not found.

2 For text of the note to the U.S., see Documents on Germany, 1944-1985, pp. 828-829.





272. Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Department of StateSource


Washington, undated.

SUBJECT

Comments on CIA Memorandum “Soviet Policy in the Aftermath of the Cuban Crisis” (29 November, 1962)1



We agree with many of CIAʼs observations and in particular with the description of considerations affecting the Soviet reaction to the Cuban crisis contained in the first third of the memorandum.

However, we differ with the presentation of probable Soviet policy decisions as being essentially a choice of two alternatives—a “hard” line devoted to an arms buildup or a “soft” line stressing negotiations, disarmament measures, and peaceful coexistence. We believe that Moscow will not choose between these two approaches, but will—as it has in the past—combine arms building with pursuit of its objectives through negotiation.

While the possibility of a major change in Soviet policy over a broad range of issues cannot be excluded, recent evidence suggests that Soviet policy on major issues will not be marked by radically new departures. The Cuban crisis appears to have added weight to the arguments on both sides of unsettled questions in Soviet policy, but without shifting the pre-existing equilibrium. It may well turn out that in the long run the principal effect of the Cuban crisis will have been to make difficult decisions even more difficult and thus add to the Soviet leadershipʼs propensity to temporize, adopt half-measures and avoid taking radical decisions.

Because we do not view Soviet policy alternatives as a single hard-soft dichotomy, we disagree with the estimate, in paragraph 17, that an assertive US policy would unquestionably impel Khrushchev toward a “hard” line. Obviously an aggressive US policy (demanding Soviet withdrawal from Eastern Europe, for example) would have that effect, and in the extreme case might even drive the Soviet leaders to conclude that they had no alternative but to launch a pre-emptive strike. However, more moderate displays of assertiveness on the part of the West could well have the opposite effect, causing the Soviets to exert greater efforts in seeking negotiations and agreements with the West. We believe that the lesson of the passing of Soviet deadlines on Berlin and the withdrawal of missiles from Cuba is that, despite his sensitivity to appearing weak, Khrushchev will show prudence in response to a policy which is assertive without being provocative.

The reasoning in paragraph 18 likewise suffers from posing the Soviet policy alternatives as a hard-soft dichotomy. Soviet misinterpretation of our motives in offering considerable concessions is not apt to bring about a return of Soviet policy to a harder line, since the concessions might well appear to obviate a need for the harder line.

An intelligence study on Soviet post-Cuba policy is in preparation.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/11-2962. Secret. The source text bears no drafting information, but it was attached to a December 12 memorandum from Executive Secretary Brubeck to Bundy, which stated that Thompson believed he would find it of interest.

1 Document 269.





273. Editorial Note


On December 15, 1962, Pravda published a lengthy article on the espionage activities of Colonel Oleg V. Penkovsky, in which four officials at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow were implicated. In commenting on the article the Embassy reported that such a “broadside public attack” was “unprecedented in recent times,” speculated on the motivation for it, noted that the capacity of the Embassy to function normally could not fail to be affected, and asked the Department of State to consider a formal protest to forestall the further exacerbation of the situation. (Telegram 1516 from Moscow, December 15; Department of State, Central Files, 121.613/12-1562) The Department of State replied the same day advising against a protest and leaving to the Embassy the final decision on whether the U.S. officials should leave the Soviet Union. (Telegrams 1285 and 1287 to Moscow, December 15; ibid.)

On December 25 the Soviet Ministry of Foreign Affairs asked the Acting Deputy Chief of Mission to come in at 3 p.m., but shortly before that time called back to postpone the meeting for a day because it was Christmas. (Telegram 1580 from Moscow, December 25; ibid., 121.613/12-2562) On December 26 Mikhail N. Smirnovsky, Head of the American Division of the Foreign Ministry, referred to the article (and others) in the Soviet press and stated that the Ministry expected the Embassy to take immediate measures for the strict observance by its employees of the norms of diplomatic conduct. The Acting Deputy Chief of Mission replied that the United States rejected all the charges as unfounded and stated that the Soviet press seemed to be carrying on an anti-American campaign that was incompatible with high-ranking assurances to Ambassador Kohler that the Soviet Union wanted to increase understanding between the two countries. (Telegram 1582 from Moscow, December 26; ibid., 121.613/12-2662)





274. Editorial Note


On December 19, 1962, Chairman Khrushchev, in a letter to the President, noted his governmentʼs acceptance of automatic seismological stations as part of the verification process for a nuclear weapons test ban. Khrushchev then referred to a proposal he alleged had been made by Ambassador Dean in a conversation with Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Kuznetsov on October 30, specifying that the U.S. would be content with two to four on-site inspections a year to supplement the stations. Khrushchev indicated that he would be agreeable to two to three on-site inspections a year. Kennedy replied December 28, stating he was “encouraged that you are prepared to accept the principle of on-site inspections” but demurring on the number of inspections. Kennedy contended that Dean had said that eight to ten would be necessary. Nevertheless, Khrushchev, in a letter of January 7, 1963, reasserted his willingness to accept two or three annual inspections. He also agreed to Kennedyʼs suggestion that a Soviet delegation meet with a U.S. delegation to review technical problems associated with the negotiations. For texts of the letters, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VI, pages 234-240 and 247-249. For the Central Intelligence Agencyʼs analysis of the exchange, see Document 284.

Joined by a delegation from the United Kingdom, the United States and Soviet delegations met 10 times between January 14 and 31, 1963. The discussions produced no progress, and the Soviets terminated the talks saying they would continue negotiations in the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee. The President announced postponement of a series of underground nuclear tests while the technical talks were underway but began the series on February 8 after the conclusion of the talks. Between that date and June 25 the United States carried out 29 test shots. For more information, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 633-637.





275. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, December 28, 1962.

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Dobrynin, USSR

W. Averell Harriman



Marie and I were asked to dinner December 28 with Ambassador Dobrynin. We found it was a party of six—his wife, and Mr. and Mrs. Alexander Zinchuk (Counselor).

Dobrynin was obviously engaged in a fishing expedition. With a none too well concealed interest, he asked me leading questions, such as “Didnʼt I agree that the Administration was divided between those who wanted to make progress after Cuba in U.S.-Soviet relations, and those who wanted to wait and see what develops. Which of these courses is the President likely to follow?” I countered by telling him a few things which I thought would be useful, one, I felt sure that the President had been shocked by Mr. Khrushchevʼs abuse of the term “defensive weapons.” He caught my point without my having to drive it home. I said that he should not try to guess what was in the Presidentʼs mind by whom he heard was seeing him or attending meetings. The President asked people to attend meetings (outside the normal State and Defense officials) not only to get their advice, but also to make certain groups feel that they were being consulted. There was only one exception to this, an individual whose advice I could assure him the President was always ready to listen to, and that was Mr. Robert Kennedy. He commented that Robert Kennedy was always blunt and direct (obviously indicating respect).

He asked me about different people, Adlai Stevenson among others. I assured him that Adlai Stevenson would remain at the United Nations as long as he wished. He was of great value to the President, would always loyally carry out the Presidentʼs decisions. In reply to his question as to how the Saturday Evening Post article could have happened, I said I knew that such a thing couldnʼt happen in the Soviet Union, but it was not unusual in the United States for newspapermen, even friends of the President, to speculate inaccurately. Dobrynin said that he had noticed the emphasis the President placed in his press conference1 on his intention to keep his friends.

He asked whether McCloy represented the business and banking group and I said I considered McCloy represented no one but himself. However, he had the respect of a great many people, Democrats as well as Republicans, businessmen and bankers. He then commented “We find him frank, objective and have confidence in his statements.”

He appeared surprised when I told him things werenʼt going very well in Laos, and contended that we should give more time for the three groups to get together. I told him that was all very well, but when the North Vietnamese didnʼt live up to the Agreement, action must be taken, and he could be sure that before long we would be asking the Soviet Government and Mr. Khrushchev specifically to make good their promise to police the “socialist” Geneva participants.

He asked me a number of questions about my experiences with Stalin, and what I thought of him. These I answered quite frankly. In this, he gave me the feeling that he was sincerely interested or at least curious. He commented that I was the only one in the U.S. Government who had had close contact with Stalin and now with Khrushchev. He said that Stalin had grown more and more suspicious in the last years of his life even of his close associates.

He asked whether we agreed to the neutrality of Cambodia. I replied “of course” but explained details of Sihanoukʼs proposals were beyond our power to guarantee (the unsettled border of Cambodia with Thailand and South Vietnam).3 Also our constitution didnʼt permit the President to give such sweeping guarantees. I told him we would consider the matter and comment shortly. He said Soviets had reservations also and pointed out Khrushchevʼs reply “agreed in principle.”

He then asked me why I had changed my position in my talks with Pushkin4 about South Vietnam. I said it wasnʼt I who had changed—it was Pushkin. As I recalled it, in August 1961 Pushkin had indicated to me his interest in stopping the fighting in Viet Nam. When, however, I discussed it with him again in October or November of ʼ61, he had changed his tune. Both Dobrynin and Zinchuk said, “Oh, but it was in January ʼ62 when he raised the question again and you had showed no interest.” I said I didnʼt recall Mr. Pushkin giving me any indication that the Soviet Union was prepared to arrive at a practical solution. Dobrynin said, “But of course, Diem would have to go.” I said, “Well who is better than Diem?”, and I added that when Pushkin had made the same statement, I had suggested Ulbricht ought to be replaced; that ended that aspect of the talk.

Dobrynin asked whether we were imposing any conditions on Nehru. I said if he meant alignment the answer was “no.” In fact we were not imposing any conditions on our military aid. Nehru and all of India understand the danger coming from Peiping, but we had no objection to Nehru and the Indian Government maintaining good relations with the Soviet Union. I said, “If you are a friend of India, why didnʼt you try to stop Chinese aggression by threatening to end shipments of POL?” He rather slyly intimated that they had used their influence and this had something to do with the Chinese withdrawing their troops.

He wouldnʼt be led into any informative comment on the row between Moscow and Peiping. I told him that we obviously thought that it was important for India and Pakistan to make up their differences in order to live as friendly neighbors. It was obvious Peiping was opposed to this and I assumed Moscow wouldnʼt be any more cooperative. He denied this.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 601.6111/12-2862. Confidential.

1 For a transcript of the Presidentʼs press conference on December 12, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1962, pp. 866-874.

3 For text of Prince Sihanoukʼs letter to President Kennedy, August 20, requesting a U.S. guarantee of Cambodian neutrality and territorial integrity, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 1002-1003.

4 Georgi M. Pushkin, Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister.





276. Editorial Note


On January 7, 1963, Representative to the United Nations Stevenson and Soviet First Deputy Foreign Minister Kuznetzov submitted a joint letter to United Nations Secretary-General U Thant that signaled the end of negotiations for a mutually agreeable resolution to the Cuban missile crisis. The letter stated in part: “While it has not been possible for our Governments to resolve all the problems that have arisen in connexion with this affair, they believe that, in view of the degree of understanding reached between them on the settlement of the crisis and the extent of progress in the implementation of this understanding, it is not necessary for this item to occupy further the attention of the Security Council at this time.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XI, page 655. Two days later Kuznetsov met with President Kennedy in Washington. During a discussion that ranged over the crisis, its aftermath, and the future of U.S.-Soviet relations, Kennedy stressed his continuing concern over the Soviet military presence in Cuba. For text of the memorandum of conversation, see ibid., pages 658-662.





277. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in FranceSource


Washington, January 10, 1963, 9:47 p.m.

3365. Paris for Under Secretary Del by 8:00 a.m. Soviet Deputy FonMin Kuznetsovʼs one hour talk with President January 9 and 65 minute session with Secretary January 101 covered no new ground. Points at issue discussed only in general terms. These were in nature courtesy calls and atmosphere cordial at both.

Main thrust of Kuznetsovʼs remarks made under instructions was plea for improvement US-Soviet relations. Now that Cuban crisis abated and New York phase completed, it was time to move to other issues, specifically German peace treaty and disarmament. In latter context, nuclear test ban treaty touched on.

Most time in talk with President devoted to Cuba with Kuznetsov emphasizing Soviet good will and intentions carry out agreements reached in Khrushchevʼs exchanges with President. President assured him of US intention abide by its commitments.

With Secretary, Kuznetsov placed greater emphasis on German problem and asked US to come up with new proposals. He also complained of US trade discrimination against USSR and called for further improvement in cultural relations.

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/1-1063. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Guthrie, cleared with Thompson and the White House, and approved by Davis. Repeated to Moscow.

1 Regarding the Presidentʼs conversation with Kuznetzov, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XI, pp. 658-662. For memoranda of Ruskʼs conversation with Kuznetzov on trade and U.S.-Soviet relations, see Documents 278 and 279. A memorandum of their conversation on Berlin and Germany is in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XV, pp. 474-475. A memorandum of their conversation on nuclear testing is ibid., vol. VII, pp. 630-631.





278. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, January 10, 1963, noon.

SUBJECT

U.S.-Soviet Relations



PARTICIPANTS

U.S. The Secretary

John C. Guthrie, Director, SOV





U.S.S.R. Vasiliy Vasilyevich Kuznetsov, First Deputy Foreign Minister

Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador

Lev Isaakovich Mendelevich, Assistant to Kuznetsov

Viktor Pavlovich Karpov, First Secretary of Embassy (Interpreter)





Kuznetsov thanked the Secretary for the opportunity of seeing him. He said that the Secretary, of course, knew why he had been sent here by Chairman Khrushchev. After two and a half months the talks on the Cuban situation in New York had concluded and it was therefore considered useful for him to meet the Secretary now. At his meeting with the President yesterday,1 the President had expressed the opinion that while the results of the New York talks had not been everything which might have been desired, the text of the joint letter to the UN Secretary General2 did represent progress. The Secretary interjected that both the President and he appreciated the genuine effort Kuznetsov had made to achieve agreement in New York. Kuznetsov replied that the United States representatives had also been very expert and frank, expressing U.S. positions very clearly. The resulting general atmosphere had been business-like and this was encouraging.

Looking back to the end of October, Kuznetsov continued, we may say that an important conclusion should be drawn in order that we might move ahead and that U.S.-Soviet relations will be even better. He had agreed with the Presidentʼs statement that relations between the two countries should be good. The important conclusion which clearly emerges from the crisis is that when our two mighty powers display sincere efforts to reach agreement on important problems affecting the fate of mankind, they can agree. During the crisis constructive steps had been taken by the Soviet Government and Khrushchev in his exchanges with the President. The President had also taken constructive steps and as a result agreement was reached which permitted a solution to the crisis. This very important circumstance had been noted in Moscow. But with this, it is worth saying that it took only five days to agree to avert thermonuclear war but two and a half months to agree on a document reflecting the essence and spirit of the basic agreement.

Kuznetsov said that he wished to stress that the role of our two countries is outstanding as the whole world recognizes. It is, therefore, important to try over and over to improve our relations and to combine our efforts for the solution of bilateral and international problems in the interests of maintaining and consolidating peace. The Soviet Government agrees with the President that now that the New York negotiations have been concluded, the way has been paved to a certain extent to give more attention to other international problems. With regard to our relations, there is still something to do and the USSR is not satisfied with the present status. Khrushchev has made quite clear the sincere desire of the USSR to do everything possible to improve relations in order to remove obstacles in the path to the betterment of relations and then to unite our efforts to solve other problems. The Secretary probably realizes, Kuznetsov said, that the relations between us play an important role in international affairs and the world situation depends to a great extent on our relations. Kuznetsov said he had no particular problems in mind but believed the Secretary knew what they were. He did mention that our economic relations, specifically trade, are unsatisfactory and that our cultural relations, although some results have been achieved in this field, could be still further improved. The Soviet Government would like to do its best to clear away obstacles.

The Secretary said that he was very interested in Kuznetsovʼs views. We are interested in improving our relations, as the President said. We do not doubt that the President and Khrushchev bear very heavy historical responsibilities in this phase of world history. Both men understand this. This is one reason why the President had sought to maintain effective channels of communications between us. But the historical importance of our relations for good or ill makes us feel we must maintain effective communications channels and not just in the physical sense. The Secretary observed that when he became Secretary he had not dealt with Soviet affairs for some 10 years. He has observed one noticeable difference between the two periods inasmuch as it was now possible to talk with some degree of understanding across the ideological gap which separates us. One of our great problems, the Secretary said, is that we must recognize our very important ideological differences. We both try to understand our differences and we must also try to enter into the other sideʼs thinking. There was still much to be done in this area.

Twelve to 14 years ago, the Secretary observed, he had talked with Yakov Malik3 in New York and had agreed with him to talk about what each did not like about the otherʼs policy. We should try to explore genuine common interests objectively considered and attempt to establish real communications with each other. While he had been speaking about the general subject of communications, the Secretary said he also wished to talk about the problem of physical communications. Recently the United States Government had offered to establish on a reciprocal basis radio transmitters in the Embassies in Moscow and Washington. For the United States this represented simply a desire to improve our technical communications with our Embassy. Rapidity of communications is a matter of joint interest. The Secretary noted that the Soviets have two leased lines to the United States whereas we have none to the USSR.

Kuznetsov said that he did not know the details of this problem but promised to take it up upon his return to Moscow. With regard to the Secretaryʼs comments on the general spirit of our relations, Kuznetsov asserted that people in the USSR live in a magnificent and happy period. Khrushchev is a very real man who knows the spirit and thoughts of the rank and file. He is a most devoted fighter for good relations between our two countries and for the maintenance and consolidation of peace. Your President, therefore, has a good partner, Kuznetsov said, and you were lucky that you had Khrushchev as the head of the Soviet Government in October.

However, there are some groups in the U.S. who were not interested in having good relations with the USSR. This is not the case in the Soviet Union so that the U.S. has more difficulty in this sense than does the USSR. It is important not to look backward in the search for peace. Unfortunately, such tendencies do exist in the U.S. and it is up to the United States Government to handle this situation. Sometimes even United States officials show signs of this pressure. For example, in December at a press conference the Secretary4 had said that the system in Cuba was inconsistent with Western Hemispheric ideals. This sentiment reflects backward views and impressions.

The Secretary opined that it might be well for the two Foreign Offices to make up a group of four or five people, yours to try to think like Americans and ours to try to think like the Soviets. As for his December 10 press conference, the Secretary noted that the President had stated a year and a half ago that there were two points in regard to Cuba which were not negotiable: its political-military alliance with an outside power and interference in the internal affairs of other countries.

Kuznetsov observed that mutual understanding was very important but asked the Secretary whether he did not think that at this stage each side understood something about the policies of the other. Ideological differences cannot be solved. However, the USSR freely admits that even in the light of this basic difficulty we can solve important problems in the interest of peace and humanity. United States official policy is based on the understanding that a countryʼs social system is not part of its legal system. In the United States there is a theory that the Western Hemisphere is a special place which should only be bound by the ideals now found there. Not everyone will agree with this, Kuznetsov said. The situation in Latin America is not so ideal that it does not require change. Indeed, many governments in the Western Hemisphere seek change. The Soviet Union wishes for friendly relations with other countries, especially the United States, and it does not wish ideology to interfere.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/1-1063. Secret. Drafted by Guthrie and approved in S on January 16. The meeting was held in the Secretaryʼs office.

1 See footnote 1, Document 277.

2 See Document 276.

3 Yakov A. Malik, Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, 1946-1953.

4 For a transcript of Ruskʼs press conference, December 10, 1962, see Department of State Bulletin, December 31, 1962, pp. 994-1001.





279. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, January 10, 1963, noon.

SUBJECT

Trade



PARTICIPANTS

U.S. The Secretary

John C. Guthrie, Director, SOV





U.S.S.R. Vasiliy Vasilyevich Kuznetsov, First Deputy Foreign Minister

Antoliy F. Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador

Lev Isaakovich Mendelevich, Assistant to Kuznetsov

Viktor Pavlovich Karpov, First Secretary of Embassy (Interpreter)





At the end of his conversation with the Secretary,1 Kuznetsov observed that U.S.-Soviet trade had just about dried up. The Secretary replied that there were two problems in connection with this trade, one being a trade problem in that the Soviets merely buy samples while the other is a political problem.

Kuznetsov rejoined that he understood the political problem but disputed the Secretaryʼs charge that the USSR only bought samples. He handed the Secretary a report which had been prepared for him by Amtorg on the state ofUSSR-US trade relations. The report made the following points: 1. The United States Department of Commerce had stated that from October 23, 1962 no more licenses would be issued for the export of American goods to the Soviet Union and other socialist countries. According to the press this ban was of a temporary nature only. However, even before the adoption of this decision the Department of Commerce had been holding up applications for licenses on goods ordered by the USSR. Since 1961 the Department of Commerce has issued licenses for only 10% of the total sum of Soviet orders.

2. In September 1962 a cargo of Soviet-owned sugar was detained in Puerto Rico. In October 1962 a Federal court in San Juan determined that the sugar was the property of an agency of the Soviet Government. However, the local court in San Juan did not release the detained cargo and the ship sailed from San Juan in November, having left 15,000 tons detained by the American authorities.

3. The Longshoremenʼs Labor Union of the Atlantic Coast Mexican Gulf instituted in October 1962 a boycott on handling Soviet cargoes and ships which formerly used to call at Cuban ports. As a result many Soviet cargoes have not been unloaded, including the personal luggage of Soviet citizens. These actions by the Union inflict material damage both to Soviet and American trading firms and individuals and call for action by the American authorities.





* * *



* Source: Department of State, Secretaryʼs Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Drafted by Guthrie and approved in S on January 16. The meeting was held in the Secretaryʼs office.

1 See Document 278.





280. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, January 18, 1963.

Khrushchev in East Germany

The main purpose of Khrushchevʼs moderate speech to the East German party congress on 16 January1 apparently was to demonstrate the USSRʼs desire and readiness to overcome the acute differences with Peiping which are weakening and demoralizing the international Communist movement. He called for a cessation of polemics and for patience and moderation in discussing these differences.

This line may be primarily a tactical maneuver to prove that the Chinese are solely responsible for the disarray in the Communist movement if they continue, as Khrushchev may expect, to attack Soviet leadership and strategy. Khrushchevʼs restraint, however, could also reflect heavy pressures on him from other bloc and foreign Communist leaders to avoid carrying the conflict with the Chinese and Albanians to an open and avowed break.

Proposals for a Conference

A pause such as Khrushchev has requested had become necessary if the Soviet leader was not yet prepared to face up to the consequences of a break. The increasingly open and aggressively direct accusations which they were trading in their propaganda media, if continued, would have brought about a showdown guaranteed to split the movement asunder. This development was causing serious concern in Communist parties around the world, and their leaders, some Soviet and some Chinese supporters, expressed that concern by proposing the convocation of some form of international conference.

Both the Chinese and the Soviets had reprinted these proposals in their press, but continued their attacks on one another. As late as 15 January, the opening day of the East German congress, the Soviet bloc press, including Pravda, contained bitter criticism of the Albanian and Chinese views and leaders. Within these attacks, however, was the anguished cry from foreign Communist parties for unity—a unity which the other side was threatening by its unwarranted actions.

The difficulty arises in the differing definitions of what form an international conference should take and under what rules it should be convoked. The Soviet Union, supported by a majority of the Communist parties, favors reaching conclusions on the basis of majority rule. The Chinese, encouraged by the successes they scored in the last international conference, want one that would arrive at resolutions on the same basis as previously—that of unanimity.

A recognition of the difficulties in arranging for a congress was indicated in the proposals made by Togliatti and Indonesiaʼs Aidit.2 Both had suggested that a conference should be called, but each had noted that preparations for such a conference would be long and drawn out. Togliatti recommended bilateral meetings as the first stage in the process. The Italian and Chinese parties have already agreed to meet and discuss their sharply opposing views. Aiditʼs suggestion included a reference to the necessity for careful preparation which might take place “over a year or two” before a conference. Both the Soviet and the Chinese press had reprinted this line.

Khrushchev gave implied endorsement to such proposals, urging that no meeting take place until the polemics cease and “people have a chance to cool down.” He noted that a meeting now would “entail the danger of a split,” since “fighting has a logic of its own, and political passions can reach a boiling point.”

Chinese Response Awaited

The future course of the dispute will depend greatly on the line taken by the Chinese delegation to the East German congress. The practice has been to have the Chinese speak directly after the Soviet speaker at bloc party congresses. At the East German congress, however, Polandʼs Gomulka followed Khrushchev and echoed the moderate line taken by the Soviet leader. This apparent change in procedure may have been requested by the Chinese so that they might have time to assess the significance of Khrushchevʼs unexpected ploy and to prepare their response. It might also have been stage-managed by the Soviet supporters so as to demonstrate to the Chinese that they intend to agree to Khrushchevʼs request for a moratorium in the polemics.

If the Chinese respond to Khrushchev in kind, the result will be a sharp reduction in the direct attacks on one another. Differing assessments of strategy and tactics, however, will continue. Khrushchev, himself, gave a spirited defense of Soviet views on peaceful coexistence, the nature and effects of nuclear war, his handling of the Cuban crisis, and the proper way for a revolutionary party to come to power. The dispute will clearly continue but on the higher and more “principled” plane that Communists are fond of requesting.

Continuing Search for Support

Both sides will continue to drive for support from other Communist parties. One of the tactics which the Soviet Union was using during the two weeks immediately preceding the congress was to demonstrate the strength of the support which existed in the Communist world for its positions. The Soviet press devoted an unusually large portion of its pages to reprinting the speeches and resolutions of other Communists which condemned the positions of the “dogmatists.” The Chinese engaged in a similar by-play.

Peipingʼs continuing effort to mobilize support was also evidenced by the arrival in Peiping since the first of the year of leading Communists from New Zealand, Indonesia, and Japan. The Chinese are also trying to win over important factions in parties such as the Ecuadorean, where the controlling leaders are Soviet-oriented. Both sides are vying for support from North Vietnam.

A pause in the exchange of polemics between the two sides will not bring a comparable pause in this type of activity. Although Khrushchev has moved to reduce the escalation of the open dispute for the moment, it is almost certain that developments from both within and without the Communist world will revive more direct attacks on one another.

Continued Moderation on Berlin and Germany Issue

The cautious and defensive tone adopted by both Khrushchev and Walter Ulbricht in their discussion of the Berlin and German problems at the party congress provides further evidence that the USSR does not contemplate any new threats or proposals with regard to Berlin in the immediate future.

In his address, Khrushchev contended that, although four years have passed without the signing of a peace treaty, the bloc had achieved important gains. He cited the Berlin wall as “a most important step” in strengthening East German sovereignty and said the peace treaty is “no longer the problem it was before the protective measures” in Berlin were taken.

Although Ulbricht had told the congress the day before that the Soviet premier would report on the Soviet-US talks on Berlin, Khrushchev ignored this subject. He confined himself to repeating the latest Soviet proposal for placing Western forces in West Berlin under the UN flag “for a certain period of time.”

The current line in Soviet propaganda and press media reinforces the view that Soviet leaders envisage a continued hiatus in talks on Berlin until they feel strong enough to resume serious negotiations. A public lecturer in Moscow on 15 January emphasized the settlement of outstanding differences through negotiations and stated that “it would be foolish to renounce negotiations” so long as both sides continue to demonstrate interest in talks. And in his 10 January discussion with Secretary Rusk, Deputy Foreign Minister Kuznetsov asked the US to come up with new proposals on the German question.3

In his own address before the congress on 15 January, the East German party boss also was moderate in his elaboration of the Berlin problem. He even omitted several sharp anti-US passages which appeared later in the printed version of his address. Ulbricht—to make recent Soviet proposals more palatable to party functionaries—represented the formula under which Allied forces would remain in West Berlin under some form of UN aegis as only the first step in a “gradual settlement” of the Berlin problem. He insisted that any solution would have to respect East German control over the access routes.

Soviets Seek Khrushchev-Brandt Meeting

While Khrushchev is in East Berlin, Soviet representatives have been exploring the possibilities of arranging a meeting between him and West Berlin Mayor Brandt. According to an official of the West Berlin Senat (city administration), Soviet Embassy officials in East Berlin suggested on 14 January that Brandt come to see Khrushchev. A formal invitation from Khrushchev was issued on the 17th.

The USSR could exploit any such meeting in order to reinforce its contention that West Berlin should be made into a free city and become, as Khrushchev asserted in his congress speech, “an example of peaceful coexistence between states with different social orders.”



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 1-3 of the Weekly Review section of the issue.

1 For text, see Pravda and Izvestia, January 17, 1963, and Current Digest of the Soviet Press, vol. XV, No. 3, February 13, 1963, pp. 3-7, and No. 4, February 20, 1963, pp. 13-20. Extracts are printed in Documents on Germany, 1944-1985, pp. 831-833.

2 Palmiro Togliatti, Italian Communist Party Secretary, and Aidit Dipa Nusantara, leader of the Indonesian Communist Party (PKI).

3 See Document 278.





281. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, January 20, 1963, 10 a.m.

SUBJECT

Publication of Letters



PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, USSR

The Secretary

Llewellyn E. Thompson, Ambassador-at-Large, Department of State



The Secretary said he had asked the Ambassador to come in in order to express his surprise that the Soviet Government had decided, with inadequate consultation, to publish three of the letters exchanged between the President and Mr. Khrushchev.1 The Secretary said we considered it important that the President and Mr. Khrushchev maintain a channel in which they could talk privately. There was a wide gap in the ideology of the two countries which made it difficult to reach understanding on important questions without getting involved in our ideological differences.

The Secretary also pointed out that he did not wish to argue the point unduly, but confidence between the two men had recently received a shock which underlined the importance of their being able to remove misunderstanding through private communications. The Secretary expressed the hope that we could assume that the publication of these letters would not constitute a precedent with regard to private communications exchanged through this channel. There were other ways in which exchanges of a more public nature could be conducted, but he stressed the importance that one side should not decide unilaterally on publication of private exchanges, but that this should only be done on the basis of joint discussion.

In reply, the Ambassador said he had no specific instructions, but he was sure his Government considered these private exchanges valuable. In this particular case, not a single word had been published in the Soviet Union or said by their statesmen. These exchanges were handled there cautiously and very few people in Moscow knew about them. When Mr. Foster had discussed the postponement of the resumption of disarmament talks with him, he had urged that Tsarapkin be instructed not to say anything about the New York talks, and both he and Fedorenko2 had been instructed not to say anything. Then, within eighteen hours, Mr. Foster had proposed a communiqué.3 While the text of the communiqué was not particularly objectionable, this appeared to be a sudden change of line on our part.

The Secretary pointed out that in view of press speculation, we had tried to avoid reference to the exchange of letters.

Dobrynin pointed out that Mr. Foster had made reference to the negotiations on television, whereas there had been no word from the Soviet side. He also pointed out that Chairman Khrushchev had previously had occasion to complain about references in our press to correspondence between him and the President. There had been exact statements quoted from the Chairmanʼs letters, although not printed as quotes.

The Secretary said he could understand Moscowʼs viewpoint, but that nothing had been said here about the test ban talks that referred to the letters. From time-to-time reporters could guess and write speculative stories. We had tried to divert attention from the exchange of letters. It had been necessary to say something in view of the press speculation. He was glad to hear that the Soviet side considered that these exchanges should be private.

The Secretary mentioned that a Soviet Ambassador in another country had made references to these exchanges, indicating that the Soviets had virtually reached agreement with us on a number of subjects.

Mr. Dobrynin said that he was virtually certain that no Soviet Ambassadors were being informed about these exchanges, although it was always possible that if one visited Moscow, he might pick up some information.

The discussion then turned to the question of timing of the release of the letters on testing.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Thompson on January 21.

1 On January 19 Dobrynin had called Thompson and then gone to his home around 4 p.m. to say that, because of the publicity in the American press about talks in New York on a test ban agreement, the Soviet Union had decided to publish Khrushchevʼs letters to Kennedy of December 19, 1962, and January 7, 1963, and the Presidentʼs letter to the Chairman, of December 28. (For summaries of the letters, see Document 274.) At 5 p.m. Thompson informed Rusk of the conversation and suggested that the Secretary of State call in the Ambassador and tell him that he was “terribly disturbed” by the publication. (Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations) A memorandum of Thompsonʼs conversation with Dobrynin is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Dobrynin Talks.

2 Nikolai T. Fedorenko, Soviet Ambassador to the United Nations.

3 For text of the communiqué, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pp. 942-943.





282. Editorial Note


On January 22, 1963, President Kennedy met with the National Security Council. According to notes of his remarks, he stated the following regarding Cuba: “The time will probably come when we will have to act again on Cuba. Cuba might be our response in some future situation—the same way the Russians have used Berlin. We may decide that Cuba might be a more satisfactory response than a nuclear response. We must be ready—although this might not come. We should be prepared to move on Cuba if it should be in our national interest. The planning by the US, by the Military, in the direction of our effort should be advanced always keeping Cuba in mind in the coming months and to be ready to move with all possible speed. We can use Cuba to limit their actions just as they have had Berlin to limit our actions.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XI, pages 668-669.

Three days later, at a meeting of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council on January 25, Ambassador at Large Thompson expressed his opposition to several proposed courses of action against Cuba, including an instruction that would prohibit the shipment of U.S.-owned goods on Free World ships engaged in the Cuba trade. According to the summary record of the meeting, Thompson “thought we should act toward Cuba in such a way as not to provoke a reaction from theUSSR, particularly during the current period when we are seeking to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty and when we do not yet know what will flow from the split between the Chinese Communists and the USSR.” Furthermore, “he feared that if we implemented the proposed shipping orders, we might delay the withdrawal of Soviet troops still in Cuba.” Director of Central Intelligence McCone and Secretary of State Rusk both expressed doubts that the Russians would remove their troops. “We must assume that the forces there are going to stay,” stated Rusk, and therefore “the risk of delaying Soviet troop withdrawal was not great.” At a meeting of the NSC Executive Committee on February 5, the President approved the shipping order. For text of the summary record of both meetings, see ibid., pages 681-687 and 689-692.





283. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, January 24, 1963, 7 p.m.

1817. Embtel 1814.1 Communications. During general exchange with which we began discussion, Brezhnev said US and Sov Govts were now talking with each other, in contrast to Stalin period. Perhaps this conversation was not always as pleasant as we would like it to be, but at least we were talking. Even during acute situations, negotiations can help solve problems.

I said President believes, more than any other man I have ever known, in value of communication. Despite rather unhappy Vienna meeting, he continued believe in communication. As result Cuban crisis, President had come to conclusion we do not have rapid enough means of communication between our two govts. We had consequently made proposal for (1) direct teletype line from Moscow to Western Europe, which would speed our communications as do two teletype lines Sov Govt has running into New York, and (2) establishment radio stations in Embassies. I hoped we could quickly agree on this.

Brezhnev merely said he was familiar with matter and understood competent Soviet organizations were studying it.

I said I realized this and had merely wanted to mention it to him in context his statement about two govts talking to each other.

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/1-2463. Secret.

1 Telegram 1814, January 24, reported that during his courtesy call on Brezhnev, marked by cordiality and repeated expressions of sincere Soviet desire for better relations, Kohler had discussed a test ban agreement. Telegram 1815, January 24, reported on cultural exchanges (ibid., 511.61/1-2463), and telegram 1816, on two personal cases (ibid., 261.1111-Makinen). In a final telegram, 1818, January 24, Kohler added that at the end of the conversation he had asked Brezhnev if he had any message for the President. The Presidium Chairman said he wanted to send his cordial greetings and to let the President know that Soviet leaders hoped to reach a test ban agreement that would clear the way for a solution to the Berlin problem. (Ibid., 611.61/1-2463)





284. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, January 25, 1963.

Soviet Foreign Policy Developments

The publication last week of Khrushchevʼs exchange of letters with President Kennedy on a nuclear test ban,1 following the moderate treatment of the Berlin and German questions at the East German party congress, reflects Khrushchevʼs desire to improve the international atmosphere and to forestall any hardening of US positions in the aftermath of the Cuban crisis.

Khrushchevʼs 19 December letter, which reverted to Moscowʼs acceptance up to November 1961 of the principle of on-site inspections to enforce a ban on underground testing, was dispatched one week after he had publicly unveiled his latest proposal for a Berlin accommodation. These moves to demonstrate the USSRʼs desire for a resumption of meaningful negotiations with the West were apparently prompted by concern that the outcome of the Cuban crisis might result in a shift in US policy toward the more unyielding posture favored by President De Gaulle and Chancellor Adenauer in dealing with the USSR.

In his letter, Khrushchev told President Kennedy that the USSR was ready to “meet you half way” by agreeing to two or three on-site inspections a year. Since November 1961, Moscow had adamantly opposed such inspections, insisting that existing national detection systems were adequate to control a ban on tests in all environments. Khrushchev also repeated his earlier offer to establish three unmanned, automatic seismic stations in the USSR. He contended that the present moment is “eminently suitable” for a test-ban agreement and that this would facilitate negotiations on disarmament and other international problems.

Khrushchevʼs latest “concession” had been foreshadowed by private remarks of Polish and Rumanian diplomats who hinted in late November and mid-December that the USSR might put forward a proposal combining automatic seismic stations with a small number of obligatory on-site inspections.

In the bilateral Soviet-US talks in New York between 14 and 18 January, Soviet representatives took a very restrictive approach, contending that the discussions should focus exclusively on the number of on-site inspections and the number and locations of automatic stations. They maintained that theUSSR would accept no more than two or three inspections annually and three seismic stations.

Foreign Minister Gromyko took a pessimistic view of the New York talks in a private discussion with Ambassador Kohler on 18 January. He complained that the US had not correctly evaluated Khrushchevʼs letters and that it continued to insist on an unacceptable number of inspections and seismic stations.

Soviet disarmament negotiator Tsarapkin also told Ambassador Dean on 21 January that Khrushchev would not drop his rejection of the US concept of nationally manned control stations under international supervision. He said the USSR had 73 such stations which would report to an international commission but that international supervision over their operation was out of the question.

Gromyko also raised another obstacle to a test-ban agreement by stating publicly on 21 January that an agreement is impossible without the adherence of France. Insistence on this condition, which was advanced by Moscow in November 1961, would be tantamount to deliberate stalling in view of President De Gaulleʼs long-standing refusal to associate France with the test-ban negotiations.

Soviet propaganda, however, has greeted the Khrushchev-Kennedy exchange as bringing a test-ban agreement nearer than ever before in the past two years and as paving the way for the solution of the “entire” disarmament problem.

Berlin and Germany

Gromykoʼs 18 January remarks to Ambassador Kohler underscored Moscowʼs desire to hold the door open for a resumption of the Berlin dialogue. He repeated several times that the Soviet leaders are operating on the assumption that the US continues to favor further Berlin talks.

Gromyko displayed sensitivity to Western speculation that recent bloc pronouncements had removed the urgency from the Berlin problem. He warned that such a conclusion would be a great mistake. Although he urged that talks should be renewed soon, Gromyko added that the USSR would not set a deadline for their completion or for a peace treaty because this would “complicate” the question for both sides.

Soviet View of Western Developments

Soviet propaganda last week revealed Moscowʼs satisfaction over the strains in the Western alliances. Moscow cited President De Gaulleʼs rejection of the US Polaris missile offer and his opposition to Britainʼs entry into the Common Market as evidence of deep differences within the Western camp. Soviet commentators contrasted President Kennedyʼs “rosy” description of the Atlantic alliance in his State-of-the-Union message with De Gaulleʼs 14 January press conference.2

Beneath this ill-concealed pleasure over rifts in the Western world, however, were signs of Moscowʼs concern that recent events may accelerate West Germanyʼs acquisition of a nuclear capability. Soviet comments on Chancellor Adenauerʼs visit to Paris charged that De Gaulle needed Bonnʼs support in building an independent nuclear force and implied that the French President, in return, would be willing to take an elastic view of the 1954 agreements prohibiting West German possession of nuclear weapons. Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Malik, in a talk with a Western diplomat, took the line that Adenauer would support De Gaulleʼs rejection of Britainʼs membership in the Common Market since Bonnʼs only hope of obtaining nuclear weapons was through cooperation with the French.

Moscow greeted the impasse between France and Britain on the Common Market as providing much-belated confirmation of traditional Communist dogma regarding the inevitable antagonisms among capitalist states. Izvestia declared that the increasingly “acute and complicated” relations among NATO partners “shows once more that inherent in this bloc are the same features which characterized every imperialist grouping.” Moscow forecast an “extremely bitter struggle for markets” among the Western powers.

Soviet propaganda claimed that the Common Market impasse proves that the formation of “exclusive economic blocs” is not the way to stimulate world trade. It recalled Khrushchevʼs proposal for an international trade conference. Moscow also alleged that President Kennedyʼs plan for US cooperation with the Common Market has proved to be “founded on sand.”



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Secret; No Foreign Dissem; Background Use Only. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 3-4 of the Weekly Review section of the issue.

1 See footnote 1, Document 281.

2 For text of Kennedyʼs State of the Union address, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 15-16. For text of De Gaulleʼs press conference, see Major Addresses, Statements and Press Conferences of General Charles de Gaulle, May 19, 1958-January 31, 1964, pp. 208-222. An excerpt from De Gaulleʼs press conference is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pp. 378-380.





285. Editorial Note


In telegram 1840 from Moscow, January 26, 1963, Ambassador Kohler transmitted an oral statement made by Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko proposing the resumption of bilateral discussions on Berlin: “Soviet Government is ready to continue Soviet-American exchange of views on questions relating to a German peace settlement and normalization on that basis of the situation in West Berlin.” Gromykoʼs statement dealt only with how and when the talks might be resumed; it contained no substantive points. “Soviet Government will give instructions to its representatives to continue discussion of concrete questions, relating to German peace settlement and normalization of situation in West Berlin, taking into account exchange of views which has already taken place, with the goal of preparing drafts of appropriate agreements.” For text of telegram 1840, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XV, pages 480-481.





286. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, January 27, 1963, noon.

1849. On assumption we may now move toward nuclear test ban agreement and in light Gromykoʼs January 26 initiative on Germany/Berlin1 —particularly final remark re consideration to be given to “Procedure and means for definitive approval” of agreements reached—I suggest we should ourselves do some advance planning regarding procedural as well as substantive aspects talks with Soviets.

Following are a few preliminary thoughts, which might be discussed further during my visit to Washington.

On whole I see no concrete indication Khrushchev is maneuvering toward summit meeting on basis possible test-ban agreement alone. Believe Soviets realize that, however dramatic tripartite signature would be, many steps would remain, such as ratification and efforts secure adherence others. However, Soviet summit initiative cannot be excluded in this case, and above-cited language with respect to G/B is clear that Soviets have summit in mind in this connection.

In order forestall any Soviet maneuver in first case and provide basis for orderly procedure if progress should be made in second, suggest possibility US initiative at appropriate stage which would comprise proposal that nuclear test-ban treaty be signed at Geneva by Foreign Ministers with concurrent indication that Secretary would be prepared, following signature ceremony, to visit Moscow pursuant to repeated suggestions by Gromyko in course his many unreciprocated visits to Washington.

Atmosphere at time of test treaty signature would perhaps be appropriate for such visit. Signature of itself, however, is obviously not end of road even in [garble], well-defined and limited, area of our relations with Soviet Union or broader East-West relationship, since complicated and extended matter of implementation will probably be beset with many difficulties. Meeting at level higher than Foreign Ministers, therefore, would tend to cast achievement attained in false and exaggerated light.

Visit of Secretary would serve constructive purpose of affording opportunity to investigate post-treaty prospects in Soviet foreign policy without encouraging undue public optimism as to concrete results of visit and without built-in implications which are always present in meetings of heads of state and government. Additionally, Secretary might well conduct further phase discussions on G/B in light of any talks held meanwhile in Washington or Moscow.

If test-ban treaty should be agreed upon and US ratification appeared assured, and if prospects were clearly in view for agreement on modus vivendi on G/B acceptable to US, then consideration might be given to possibility final acceptance and approval of both at top level.2



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 397.5611 GE/1-2763. Secret; Limit Distribution.

1 See Document 285.

2 Printed from an unsigned copy.





287. Editorial Note


At a meeting on February 5, 1963, with Secretary of State Rusk and Secretary of Defense McNamara, Director of Central Intelligence McCone stated that “if the Soviets wished merely to control Castro and to maintain Cuba as a base for infiltrating Latin America they could do so at much less cost and with much less provocation than the present program.” McCone “therefore warned that in his opinion we could expect a more ominous situation relative to Cuba—perhaps the introduction of offensive weapons again.” In a message to Rusk, February 13, McCone reiterated his “growing concern over the possibility of reintroduction of an offensive capability in Cuba.” For text of McConeʼs memorandum of the February 5 meeting and his February 13 message, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XI, pages 694 and 698-699.

On March 13 McCone reported at a meeting of the National Security Council “that Soviet troops were withdrawing from Cuba,” but “because there appears to be no movement of major items of military equipment, we do not know whether the Soviet troop withdrawal to date has actually affected the Soviet military capability in Cuba.” For text of the summary record, see ibid., pages 715-718. During a discussion with McCone on March 26, President Kennedy stated “that he had once felt that the Soviets would withdraw all of their forces from Cuba, but that he had now reached the conclusion that the plan had changed.” McCone responded that the indicators as to Soviet intentions were conflicting. Certain information “would lead one to the conclusion that a gradual and continuing withdrawal would take place,” probably over “the balance of the year.” On the other hand, the “building of permanent installations and the arrival of undisclosed but apparently sophisticated equipment” supported a conclusion “that the Soviets were there to stay, but perhaps on a somewhat reduced scale.” For text of McConeʼs memorandum of discussion, see ibid., page 731.





288. Editorial Note


On February 7, 1963, Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin made an oral presentation to Secretary of State Rusk on non-proliferation. He again expressed opposition to any multilateral agreement giving Germany access to nuclear weapons: “The Soviet Government deems it necessary to declare again that transfer of nuclear weapons to the West German armed forces irrespective of the manner in which this is carried out would greatly complicate and aggravate the situation in Europe. The world would be confronted with a new danger and the Soviet Union naturally would be compelled to take all the ensuing measures.” Gromykoʼs statement continued: “The Soviet Government deems it necessary to state that if the U.S. Government actually proceeds with proliferating nuclear weapons to other states participating in NATO and the number of states possessing nuclear weapons is increased the Government of the Soviet Union will be compelled to draw from this necessary conclusions and will respond in kind, that is, will see to it that appropriate countries friendly toward theUSSR will receive nuclear weapons.” In responding Rusk emphasized that the multilateral arrangements which the United States was considering would not increase the number of nations which could fire nuclear weapons. If the Soviet Union wished to make similar arrangements with its allies, the United States would have no objection. For text of the memorandum of conversation and Dobryninʼs oral statement, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 640-644.





289. Memorandum on the Substance of Discussion at a Department of State-Joint Chiefs of Staff MeetingSource


Washington, undated.

Subject meeting consisted of presentations by Ambassadors Kohler, Bruce and Dowling.

Ambassador Kohler

General LeMay1 asked Ambassador Kohler to cover any items that he felt might be of interest to the JCS, and Ambassador Kohler said that he would like to begin by giving a rundown of the impressions he had gained in his first four months as Ambassador to the USSR. He noted that prior to his recent return to Moscow, he had not been stationed there in 13 years. This intervening period permitted him, upon his return, to view the local scene in a more dispassionate way since his previous experiences in Moscow had become so conditioned and affected by day-to-day frustrations and exasperations. The changes which have occurred in the USSR these 13 years are upward in nature—slowly but steadily. The evolution in the development of the Soviet society during this period is remarkable. The physical changes are quite evident—the people are better dressed, there are more automobiles on the streets, etc. The atmosphere is far more relaxed and the air of pervading fear is gone. The era of waiting for the dreaded knock on the door in the night and the ever-packed suitcase is gone. There is a very striking ferment throughout Soviet society. Ambassador Kohler warned that all he referred to is relative to the situation under Stalin, and that it does not in any sense reflect a situation approximating that in any democratic nation. Khrushchev has no intention of relaxing controls to such an extent, and the Soviet Union is a highly controlled closed society. However, people are now free and willing to talk to Americans. The number of such exchanges with the U.S. diplomatic community has increased by a factor of ten over previous years. We know more about what is going on since people seek us out to talk.

Ambassador Kohler said that Khrushchev must rely on the party for control and that the Army is under party control. However, the basis of power is spread throughout various centers in the country. It is not strictly controlled in Moscow as under Stalin. Khrushchev does not possess the power to make tough decisions in the center and make them stand up to the degree that Stalin did. A good example is his recent crackdown on art and literature. People are fighting back against this decision publicly. The artists and writers may lie low for awhile but they will not change nor will they cease their activities.

Ambassador Kohler said that he, like many others, was surprised by the Soviet miscalculation in Cuba. He noted that there had been much speculation on the reasons for the Soviet move in Cuba as well as the manner in which it had been arrived at. These included guesses that it was a move forced by the military or that it was solely a political decision by Khrushchev. Ambassador Kohler said that these speculations on Soviet aims and possible internal differences are not justified or important. What is important is the very real relief shown by the Soviet leadership at the peaceful settlement of the Cuban problem. The whole structure of Soviet leadership was shocked to the core by being taken to the brink of war. They did not like what they saw and experienced, and they had absolutely no stomach for a showdown. This was unmistakable and their relief was real and genuine in every respect.

Ambassador Kohler said that he is not altogether certain where we stand in the aftermath of Cuba. The Soviets have indicated a desire to reopen talks on Berlin, they have pursued a campaign to picture Khrushchev as a man of peace, and they have extended the doctrine of peaceful co-existence. They probably are looking and hoping for some relaxation. Ambassador Kohler said that he did not expect any early Soviet move against Berlin. After Cuba the Soviets talked about Berlin but they did not take any initiative. For our part, we have also avoided taking any initiative. Two weeks ago the Soviets made, by implication, the most serious approach to us on Berlin that they have made since November, 1958.2 The Ambassadorial Group is now studying this approach.

Ambassador Kohler said that there are limits on what we may expect in any easing of the Cuban situation. U.S. domestic pressures and public criticism will make it difficult for the Soviets to reduce their presence and activities in Cuba without severe loss of face. Soviet troubles with the ChiComs and their lack of success in geographical expansion in other areas through peaceful means will require them to maintain a militant position toward Castro. Khrushchev might have relaxed his pressures and activities in Cuba if he had been given more time. However, U.S. domestic pressure now has him on the hook. On the other hand, the Soviets feel they have a pretty good case in Cuba. If we threatened strong action against the USSR in Cuba now, we certainly could not expect to get the backing we got the first time around.

General LeMay asked how the Soviets are reacting to the Sino-Indian conflict. Ambassador Kohler replied that it has given the Soviets a real solid headache. They have floundered around and swayed on the tightrope they have tried to walk. They have also tried to support both sides. The Indian Ambassador in Moscow has been pushing the Soviets hard and he has achieved some success. He has gotten more out of the Soviets than was to be expected, particularly in the provision of MIG aircraft. The MIG deal means little or nothing militarily, but it has profound political and psychological significance. The provision of military aid by a communist country to the active foe of another communist country is an unheard of act. It is almost impossible to get Soviet leaders to discuss any aspect of the matter. The actual depth of the Sino-Soviet split is a question mark. It does not appear that the Soviets are attempting to formalize it. However, there is a real struggle underway at present among the Communist Parties and we do not have much information on the nature or details of this fight. The possibility of a hard split is a real one. It is obvious that the Soviets will not share economic wealth or resources with the ChiComs. It is also quite apparent that the Soviets will not permit the ChiComs to get them embroiled in a conflict with the U.S. except on USSR terms and under USSR controls.

General LeMay asked if the Soviets will attempt to take advantage of the present political difficulties existing in NATO. Ambassador Kohler said that while they would attempt to gain some propaganda advantages, they would not pursue any serious course of action. First, they have serious difficulties within their own camp and second they take a far more jaundiced view of the Franco-German accord than we do. The Soviets believe that Adenauer is using De Gaulle and manipulating him to his own ends. They believe that Adenauer persuaded De Gaulle to veto UK entry into the Common Market. However, there is no prospect of a Paris-Moscow accord. This does not appear to be in the cards.

General LeMay asked what importance the Soviets give to Africa and how they feel about their present position in that continent. Ambassador Kohler said that the Soviets have priority objectives and great aspirations in Africa and have devoted a great deal of effort and resources to accomplishing them. They appear disappointed in their relative lack of success to date. This failure also tends to disprove Khrushchevʼs theory of peaceful victory through economic and political penetration. African diplomats in Moscow have indicated that the Soviets are disillusioned over the relative lack of success they have had in Africa, particularly in view of the high hopes they had at one time. The suppression of Communist Parties in various African nations has been a setback they did not expect. Their greatest disappointments have come from developments in Egypt, Morocco, Mali, Guinea and Ghana. The lack of progress in Africa probably increases Soviet determination to hang on to their present position in Cuba.

Admiral Ricketts3 asked Ambassador Kohler to give his views on ultimate Soviet objectives in Cuba in the aftermath of the missile withdrawals. Ambassador Kohler said that the situation changes as circumstances alter. However, the Soviets essentially regard Cuba as a base, as a toehold and a platform for various activities. The Soviets are somewhat worried over their position in Cuba as a result of their differences with Castro. They find his adoption of the ChiCom line to be a burdensome problem. He demanded a very high economic price from them and they are paying it. On the one hand they keep troops in Cuba because they distrust Castro and on the other hand their troops are used to support him. In summary, the Soviets have real problems in Cuba and they are following a holding operation for the present.

Admiral Ricketts then asked how Ambassador Kohler viewed current Soviet-Yugoslav relations. The Ambassador replied that the view from Embassy Moscow is not the same as that from Embassy Belgrade. From Moscow, it appears that Tito won a total victory—this does not coincide with Ambassador Kennanʼs view but that is the way it appears from Moscow. Tito gave only a little, if at all, and he gained a great deal. He may end up with observer status in the Common Market as well as in the Bloc organization. The present state of affairs would appear to justify Titoʼs policies and should enhance him as an example to the leaders of satellite nations. He, in effect, is having the best of both worlds with no loss of freedom. The implications of this will not be lost on Gomulka.4

General Shoup5 asked if Ambassador Kohler believed that Khrushchev was “calling the shots” in Viet Nam and if so, what his probable reaction would be to the application of U.S. pressure on Hanoi. Ambassador Kohler replied that he could not be specific on this question but he did feel that two general considerations ruled MoscowʼsSEA policy. First, Moscow did not wish to see the ChiComs win the present struggle among the Communist Parties in the area. Second, Moscow prefers to keep a relative calm in the area and desires to prevent any ChiCom actions which would involve them in open conflict with the U.S.

General LeMay asked how the Soviets had reacted to the MLF proposals and the planned removal of Jupiter missiles from Italy and Turkey. Ambassador Kohler stated that the Soviets had given factual reporting to the Jupiter withdrawals and had not attempted to link them with Cuba. Just last night they had made representations to Secretary Rusk on the MLF.6 This move was to be expected in addition to standard news treatment and various other personal approaches. The Soviets are anti-anything which even implies possible German involvement with nuclear weapons. They feel that the MLF is a step in this direction. However, they are far more afraid of a German-French bilateral than they are of the MLF. If given a choice they would greatly prefer the MLF to a real hard Franco-German accord. They are opposed to the Common Market for many reasons, not the least of which is the fact that it is not in keeping with their economic and political theories. If faced with an effective Common Market, the Soviets would prefer to see the UK as a member in order to offset to a degree the German role in the organization. Mr. Nitze asked if the Soviets would take any hard steps against the MLF and Ambassador Kohler said that they probably would not. They know that it is a long way from being a reality and, accordingly, no signs of concrete action seem likely.

[Here follow presentations by Ambassadors Bruce and Dowling.]



* * *



* Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, State/JCS. Secret. The source text is a Department of State draft, not cleared with the Department of Defense.

1 Major General Curtis E. LeMay, Chief of Staff of the U.S. Air Force.

2 See Document 285.

3 Admiral Claude V. Ricketts, Vice Chief of Naval Operations.

4 Wladyslaw Gomulka, First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Polish United Workersʼ Party.

5 General David M. Shoup, Commandant of the U.S. Marine Corps.

6 See Document 288.





290. Editorial Note


On February 8, 1963, President Kennedy met with key advisers on U.S. test ban policy. According to Atomic Energy Commission Chairman Seaborgʼs record of the meeting, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Director Foster stated that “the key to any test ban is underground tests because the detection of the other types is easy and not at issue.” Further, he “said he would like to have authority to go eventually to six on-site inspections as a fall-back position.” Commenting that he thought six on-site inspections “the rock-bottom position,” President Kennedy “said we should proceed on the assumption that the USSR will cheat, and then work out the advantages, that is, compare what they might gain by cheating with the advantages that banning tests would have with respect to the Chinese situation.” Kennedy added that “the whole reason for having a test ban is related to the Chinese situation. Otherwise, it wouldnʼt be worth the disruption and fighting with Congress, etc.” For text of Seaborgʼs record of the meeting, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 644-646.

On February 17 the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency circulated a paper recommending U.S. positions at the test ban talks in Geneva. The next day the President discussed the paper with the Committee of Principals, and inspection procedures were agreed on. For more information and text ofACDAʼs memorandum to President Kennedy summarizing the recommendations in its February 17 paper, see ibid., pages 648-650. On April 1 the United States and United Kingdom submitted a memorandum to the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee that proposed an annual quota of seven reciprocal, on-site inspections, with each side inspecting the other rather than relying on an international commission, and seven automatic seismic stations in both the Soviet Union and the United States. For text, see Documents on Disarmament, 1963, pages 141-145.





291. Memorandum From the Ambassador to the Soviet Union (Kohler) to Secretary of State RuskSource


Washington, February 9, 1963.

SUBJECT

Conversation with Soviet Ambassador



I had luncheon on February 8 and a two-and-a-half hour talk alone with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin. Following are the highlights.

Embassy Housing. I assured Ambassador Dobrynin that the State Department would do everything possible to help him in connection with his plans to acquire new housing in Washington. At the same time I mentioned to him my own plans to get new housing for our people and for our offices in Moscow.1

Nuclear Non-proliferation. We had a long discussion on this subject along the lines of the Secretaryʼs conversation with him on February 7.2 We agreed that our interest in this subject was a common one and I argued strongly that our own plans for a multilateral nuclear force were the best way to forestall the growth of pressures in Germany for an independent nuclear capability or a possible Franco-German deal on this subject. I expressed my skepticism about the threat in his démarche to the Secretary that the Soviet Union would share its nuclear weapons with its own friends. He did not directly reply but did say that they did not want either of us to do any sharing.

Cuba. Dobrynin said that he realized the Cuban question was poisoning the atmosphere of our relationship but that frankly he was at a loss as what to advise his Government.3 He sometimes had the feeling that even if they abandoned Cuba entirely and even helped our overthrow of Castro, some people in the United States would charge that it was too little and too late. I told him I could not discuss this in detail. However, I pointed out to him the Presidentʼs problem in this respect and the efforts the President was making to restrain the emotions connected with this question. I gave him the personal opinion that it would be very helpful if there could be well publicized photographs in the papers every week or so of Soviet ships leaving Cuba with Soviet military personnel obviously visible on the decks.

Nuclear Tests. Dobrynin apparently felt optimistic about our reaching agreement on a nuclear test ban agreement. At the same time he made it clear that the Soviets would contemplate the signing of such an agreement as an appropriate occasion for a meeting between the President and Chairman Khrushchev. I argued that this would be premature since the ratification process would still lie ahead in the United States and the charter members would be committed to solicit other adherents. I expressed the opinion that the ratification process would be complicated here since under our system the Senate could charge that the President by dramatizing the signature was taking Senate ratification for granted and abrogating their function. I therefore thought it would be much better that any meeting should follow the accomplishment of ratification and hopefully could take place at a time when other problems could then be dealt with successfully by the Heads of Government.



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR, Dobrynin Talks. Secret. Drafted by Kohler. Copies were sent to Bundy and Tyler. Kohler was in Washington for consultations.

1 A memorandum of Kohlerʼs conversation with various Department of State officials on this question, also on February 8, is in Department of State, Central Files, POL 17 USSR-US.

2 See Document 288.

3 In a meeting with Dobrynin on February 9, Rusk twice repeated the comment that Kohler had made to Dobrynin the previous day, that Cuba was “poisoning” U.S.-USSR relations. Rusk indicated that the United States had “no desire or intention to invade Cuba” but that a “wholly unqualified commitment” depended “on the attitude of the Cuban Government.” Rusk also emphasized that the continued presence of Soviet troops in Cuba “contributes to the heightened tensions in our relationship.” For text of the memorandum of conversation, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XI, pp. 696-698.





292. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in FranceSource


Washington, February 11, 1963, 7:44 p.m.

Topol 1108. Deliver Ambassador Finletter1 by 9:00 a.m. February 12.

1. Before US Ambassador to USSR left Moscow for consultations in Washington, Sov Foreign Minister Gromyko made oral statement to him expressing Soviet Governmentʼs concern re alleged US pressure on other countries to prevent deliveries of wide-diameter pipe to USSR.2 Gromyko asked US Ambassador to inform President of US that head of Soviet Government, Khrushchev, placed particular emphasis on this problem and hoped US Govt and President would take that into account in considering it.

2. USG planning low-key reply to Gromyko on US Ambassadorʼs return to Moscow, about February 14, in following terms: a) US treats pipe over 19 inches as having military and strategic significance and prohibits its export to USSR. If international situation improves and Western Allies able feel danger to their national security has lessened, US would naturally re-examine its position on pipe exports.

b) Determination what constitutes “strategic” goods matter for decision by countries concerned based evaluation national security interests. Recent issue East German military magazine emphasized military and strategic importance to Sov Bloc of Friendship pipeline and compared it to NATO pipeline.

c) NATO countries have been discussing question of strategic significance of pipe and exports of pipeline to USSR: If certain NATO countries have taken action to restrict such exports, such measures have been undertaken strictly on their own responsibility in light of their judgment of their own security interests.





3. Request USDel inform Stikker3 beforehand and NAC Perm Reps at beginning Defense Data briefing February 12 of Gromyko approach and nature intended US oral reply.



Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 12-3 USSR. Secret;Niact. Drafted by Kupinsky (EUR); cleared by EUR, E, Tyler, Kohler, Davis, and Bundy; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Rome, London, Paris, and Moscow.

1 Thomas K. Finletter, U.S. Permanent Representative at the North Atlantic Council.

2 The Embassy in Moscow transmitted the text of Gromykoʼs statement in telegram 1841, January 26. (Department of State, Central Files, STR 12-3 USSR)

3 Dirk U. Stikker,NATO Secretary General.





293. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, February 13, 1963, 5 p.m.

SUBJECT

Warning to Soviet Embassy on Intelligence Activities of Soviet Officials



PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Georgi M. Kornienko, Counselor, Soviet Embassy

Mr. Richard H. Davis, Deputy Assistant Secretary for European Affairs

SOV—Robert I. Owen



Counselor Kornienko was called in to the Department to receive a protest against continuing intelligence activities by Soviet personnel of their Embassy and Amtorg.

Mr. Davis reminded Mr. Kornienko that on various occasions in the past the Department has called the Embassyʼs attention to impermissible activities carried on by officials of the Soviet Embassy and Amtorg. He recalled his conversations with Mr. Smirnovsky on this subject August 9, 1961 and December 21, 1961 and referred to Mr. Guthrieʼs discussion on this question with Mr. Filippov on June 5, 1961.

Mr. Davis said that the Department is seriously disturbed by the continuing intelligence activities of a number of Soviet Embassy and Amtorg officials and employees, activities which continue in spite of repeated warnings in the past. He observed that the only apparent effect of the US warnings seems to have been the shifting of some of these activities from Amtorg to Embassy officials. Mr. Davis cited as Soviet officials particularly flagrant in improper activities Mr. G.A. Nikolaev of Amtorg, Mr. B.S. Petrikovski, an employee of the office of the Embassyʼs Commercial Attaché, and Embassy Third Secretary A.V. Kuznetsov. Mr. Davis stressed that we are aware of improper activities by a goodly number of other Soviet officials and that the three persons mentioned were those whose activities have been especially bad. Mr. Davis said that we are asking that such activities be stopped.

Mr. Kornienko asked if he had correctly understood Mr. Davis to say intelligence activities. After receiving Mr. Davisʼ affirmative response, Mr. Kornienko stated that he could not accept this kind of accusation since he knew that the Soviet Embassy and other Soviet establishments in this country are not involved in any “unofficial” activities. He would, of course, report Mr. Davisʼ comments to his Embassy and the government of theUSSR. He repeated that, as far as he personally was concerned, he absolutely could not accept “that kind of accusation.”

Mr. Davis said that on our part we consider that our knowledge of these activities was conclusive, that our sole interest is that these improper activities cease and that we do not intend to give publicity to our warning. Mr Kornienko said that he had nothing to add but repeated that he would bring the matter to the attention of his Embassy and government.1



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 17 USSR-US. Confidential. Drafted by Owen.

1 Following this conversation Davis and Kornienko also discussed plans for new U.S. and Soviet Embassy buildings in Moscow and Washington. A memorandum of that part of the conversation is ibid.





294. Editorial Note


On February 13, 1963, Assistant Secretary of State Harriman called in Ambassador Dobrynin to remind him of the Presidentʼs comments to Soviet First Deputy Chairman Mikoyan on Laos on November 29, 1962 (see Document 270). Viet Minh troops were still in Laos, and North Vietnam was still using Laotian territory as an infiltration route to South Vietnam, in violation of the Geneva agreements. For text of telegram 1697 to Moscow reporting on the meeting, February 14, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XXIV, pages 933-934.





295. Memorandum of Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and the Editor of the Saturday Review (Cousins)Source


Washington, February 19, 1963.

Mr. Norman Cousins came in to give me an interesting account of his visit to Moscow and his discussions with Khrushchev in December 1962.1 The following is the substance of his report:

Mr. Cousins had been invited by the Vatican to undertake a private mission to Moscow in order to put certain questions to Khrushchev on behalf of the Vatican. [Here follow 5-1/2 paragraphs on Cousinsʼ mission for the Vatican.]

Upon arrival in Moscow he saw Khrushchev during a very busy week but was given considerable time (I had the impression of two hours by the Chairman). When Cousins remarked to Khrushchev that he, the Chairman, had had a very busy week the Chairman said that, in political life, such weeks were like a ladyʼs corset—“It was necessary to have them from time to time in order to stay in shape but it felt very good when you could take them off.”

Khrushchev spoke at some length about Russian affairs. He claimed that Soviet industry was showing an encouraging twenty per cent overproduction in terms of the Plan and that he felt that major gains were being achieved. He affirmed that there was a genuine crisis in agriculture and that agricultural norms had been missed by a wide margin and that much remained to be done. He said that they were trying to work out some means by which responsibility could be decentralized to the “action level” and to shake off the paralysis of undue centralization. Khrushchev expected the Communist Party to be the “mind and eyes” of the people and to take the action necessary in local situations to produce results in accordance with the demonstrated desires of the people concerned. Khrushchev said that they were borrowing from capitalism the notion of incentives and that the Soviet Union would be placing more and more emphasis upon personal incentives in order to get on with the job. In discussing de-Stalinization, Khrushchev commented that it was necessary to shift from the highly centralized and ruthless regime of Stalin to a dimension of responsibility to all those who are in a position to take action. Khrushchev said that the difference between Lenin and Stalin was that Lenin forgave his enemies but Stalin killed his own friends.

Cousins, on instruction from the Vatican, made the point to Khrushchev that the Vatican was very upset by the distortion which Soviet propaganda had given to the statements made by the Vatican during the week of the Cuban crisis. If the Soviet Union thought that these statements represented any basic movement away from the West toward the Soviet Union or any revision of the Vaticanʼs attitude toward genuine co-existence this was a great mistake. Khrushchev responded that some of his own journalists “donʼt know how to handle good news”. He said that he has constant difficulty with his own propaganda machine because they respond in a doctrinaire fashion where a more pragmatic attitude would be more productive.

Khrushchev said to Cousins that he knew full well that he would not convert the Pope to Communism and that the Pope would not convert him to Catholicism. But he added, “But stranger things than this have happened.”

[Here follows another paragraph on the Vatican mission.]

Khrushchev then asked Cousins to see Zhukov. Cousins replied that he had seen Zhukov two days before whereupon Khrushchev said he ought to see him again—implying that the Chairman had had some discussion with Zhukov since Cousins last saw him.

Cousins then saw Zhukov who said that “the Chairman has to have some results for his policy” of attempting to find some agreement with the West. Zhukov said that unless the Chairman can show some results there would necessarily be a major change in the Soviet attitude. He said that he was not saying this to Cousins as a threat but simply as a statement of the political facts of life in the Soviet Union. Zhukov thought that there were three fields in which some real progress might be possible: (a) nuclear testing; (b) Berlin; (c) outer space. Zhukov thought that cooperation in outer space was in pretty good shape and was on the tracks. On nuclear testing he insisted that Khrushchev was convinced that his agreement to three on-site inspections and three automatic seismic stations would fully meet the United States requirements. Zhukov referred, for example, to his own conversation with Dr. Weisner2 and claimed that Dr. Wiesner had said that two or three on-site inspections would be all that would be required. Zhukov said that Soviet leaders had been deeply disturbed about President Kennedyʼs rejection of the 3-3 proposal and felt that they had been hoodwinked.

On Berlin, Zhukov said that the only remaining question of any importance was the presence of American forces in West Berlin. He said that it was necessary for us to help Khrushchev to “save face” by accepting aUN flag over Western forces in West Berlin. I questioned Cousins specifically about whether Zhukov had used the phrase “save face” and Cousins insisted that Zhukov had in fact done so.

Cousins concluded the conversation by saying that he would be returning to the Soviet Union and would be in touch with me in the event that I had anything I wished to say before he went.3 I thanked him for his report and told him I would be glad to have a word with him before he returned to the Soviet Union.

Dean Rusk4



* * *



* Source: Department of State, S/AL Files: Lot 67 D 2. Secret. Drafted by Rusk.

1 For another account of the visit, see Cousins, The Improbable Triumvirate, pp. 32-57.

2 Jerome B. Wiesner, Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology.

3 For Cousinsʼ account of his second trip to the Soviet Union in April, see The Improbable Triumvirate, pp. 83-110.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.





296. Telegram From the Department of State to the Delegation to the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee at GenevaSource


Washington, February 21, 1963, 7:47 p.m.

Todis 811. Following is Deptʼs assessment Soviet draft nonaggression treaty tabled Geneva Feb 20:1 1. Obviously this not draft which Sovs expect West to sign because multilateral treaty form would require Western signature along with GDR. As such it is less forthcoming toward West than standing Soviet offer dating back to May 5, 19582 to work out form which would not require Western andGDR signatures on same document.

2. Sovs have long been interested in NATO-Warsaw nonaggression treaty or no-force pledge (their first proposal made in July 1955),3 both as device for creating impression that USSR not a military threat to Europe and as means of securing Western acquiescence to status quo in Eastern Europe and acceptance existence of—if not formal recognition—GDR and its frontiers which would be implied in new formal renunciation of use of force. Sovs may hope nonaggression pledge would embarrass Western response to pressure on Berlin.

3. Sovs apparently believe that public discussion European security topics at this time will spur questioning of Western defense arrangements and contribute to differences among allies. Tabling of nonaggression treaty on heels of draft declaration on bases4 suggests Sovs may intend table refurbished versions other European disarmament schemes such as denuclearization (possibly including new emphasis on Balkans), troop withdrawals, and possibly prevention of surprise attack.

4. In context ENDC, tabling draft treaty and declaration on bases suggests Sovs intend use Geneva as platform for propaganda attacks on Western defense arrangements. Draft documents may be designed in part to draw attention away from exclusive focus on test ban issue at Geneva, although even if this supposition accurate move does not shed light one way or another on Soviet intentions with regard to test ban.

5. Soviet move may be intended to remove nonaggression pact from context of talks on Berlin, and may reflect Soviet effort to narrow range of issues to be discussed in any new round of Berlin conversations in order to press for agreement on status, troop-presence and access questions.

6. Soviet draft treaty bears strong family resemblance to earlier Soviet draft treaty language. Most notable difference is duration clause which is not specifically tied to conclusion of general European security treaty. Though new draft would not preclude re-introduction of Soviet proposal for such pact, it suggests Sovs prepared to let that idea lapse.





For USRO: You may use foregoing assessment in POLAD or NAC.5



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 18-3 Switz (GE). Secret. Drafted by Robert Baraz (INR); cleared by Valdes, INR, ACDA, EUR, and BTF; and approved by INR. Repeated to Paris and Moscow.

1 For text of the Soviet draft, which was transmitted in Disto 1105 from Geneva, February 20 (ibid.), see Documents on Disarmament, 1963, pp. 57-58. In commenting on the draft, the U.S. Delegation to the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee stated that the committee was an inappropriate forum for its discussion since not all of the NATO or Warsaw Pact countries were participants. (Disto 1107 from Geneva, February 20; ibid.) There was no formal discussion of the Soviet draft treaty.

2 For text of this Soviet proposal, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pp. 794-800.

3 For text of this proposal, July 21, 1955, see Documents on Germany, 1944-1985, p. 454.

4 For text of this declaration, February 12, 1963, see Documents on Disarmament, 1963, p. 49.

5 Printed from an unsigned copy.





297. Editorial Note


In telegram 2094, from Moscow, February 25, 1963, Ambassador Kohler reported that he had carried out the instructions in telegram 1771 from the Department of State, February 21, to inform Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko of U.S. readiness to resume “bilateral exploratory talks on Berlin and Germany to see whether basis for fruitful negotiations exists.” For text of both telegrams, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XV, pages 489-490 and 492-493.





298. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence McCone to the Executive Director of Central Intelligence (Kirkpatrick)Source


Washington, February 25, 1963.

I continue to be concerned over the objectivity with which our analysts and estimators appraise the developments in Sino-Soviet relations. It is of interest to me that press, radio and TV commentators all seem to interpret various actions by the Soviet Union and the Chinese Communists as indicating some effort towards rapprochement and reconciliation. In fact some reporting has been very optimistic—probably greatly overstated—on the prospects for reconciliation. On the other hand, the tone of CIA reporting as evidenced by this morningʼs item on Sino-Soviet relations,1 indicates to me that our analysts continue with the conviction that no reconciliation is possible and that new steps in the controversy are in preparation.

A reconciliation or a suspension of the hostility that we have witnessed for the past year or so would have a very considerable effect on our vital interests. It would, for instance, permit the Soviets to take more aggressive action against the West with a confident feeling that they were not exposed dangerously on their southeastern border. Likewise, Sino-Soviet relationships would affect importantly such matters as the India-ChiCom controversy, nuclear testing, disarmament and other current problems.

I raise this question because I feel we must study the indicators with great care and great objectivity and not be influenced by a preconceived conclusion in this matter. It appears to me that it is in Khrushchevʼs interest to find a reconciliation and, with the ChiComs hard-pressed technologically and economically, it might be in their interests to “make up”, even at the cost of setting aside some of their basic ideological positions.

John A. McCone



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DCI (McCone) Files: Job 80-B01285A. Secret. Also addressed to Cline and Kent; a copy was sent to Carter.

1 Not further identified.





299. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, February 25, 1963, 8 p.m.

2095. Deptels 16681 and 17412 to Moscow. Pipeline. I made oral statement to Gromyko on pipeline as per reftels.

Gromyko said he would inform SovGovt and Khrushchev personally of US reply. He said USG obviously considers that threat to cut off export of pipe by certain countries to USSR would sabotage Soviet economic development. Such calculations were groundless. This could in no way weaken Soviet economic potential. USG had brought pressure on FRG, which had in turn brought pressure on its industrialists, some of whom had specially constructed facilities to supply USSR with pipe. Latter were forced to refuse export pipe to USSR. Only FRG industrialists would suffer from this, not USSR. Calculations that Soviet economic potential would be weakened or that it would be damaged were founded on nothing. It was, rather, a question of principle for USSR.

Gromyko said that when Khrushchev meets with President, Soviets hear statements from American side that US is striving for international cooperation, and US reps say same sort of thing in UN and other international bodies on cooperation in economic, political, and cultural fields. At same time, US applies gross pressure to stop trade with USSR, in crude contradiction to those statements. It was hard to reconcile these two things: US statements about improving US-Soviet relations and pressure to force certain countries to stop trade with USSR in peaceful products, “and I emphasized peaceful.”

Gromyko said SovGovt categorically protested this. That was why he had taken advantage of my trip to Washington to bring this to my attention so I could transmit it to USG.

Referring to statement that USG would “continue to keep all aspects this question under consideration,” Gromyko said this was not clear to him. SovGovt hoped there would be substantive change in situation. This sentence sounded as though situation could go on this way for number of years, while US continued keep it under consideration. He would be grateful if I could clarify this sentence.

I said I could. I said our attitude was not directed against Soviet economic potential, but concerned strategic goods of military significance. I said we had restricted list of such goods, which does not affect normal trade. Nor could I accept contention that US had pressured other countries. These countries had made their own decisions. It was of course true that matter had been discussed in NATO. I noted I was not accustomed to hearing that US had pressured Adenauer, since usual accusation was that Adenauer had pressured US.

Specifically as regards his query, I said that two matters we had discussed thus far (i.e., Berlin/Germany3 and pipe) were not unrelated. So long as tension in Central Europe, it would be necessary to take such measures. If there were progress toward real relaxation, this might warrant reconsideration.

Gromyko said he could not regard my clarification as satisfactory; it was fully unsatisfactory. Soviets believed it was a mistake to carry on business with USSR this way.

I said I would report this further discussion of the subject.4

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 12-3 USSR. Secret. Repeated to Paris, Bonn, London, Rome, The Hague, and Brussels.

1 Printed as Topol 1108, Document 292.

2 In telegram 1741, February 18, Kohler was instructed to make an oral reply along the lines laid down in telegram 1668 and to preface his remarks with the following statement:

“I am under instructions to assure you that in view of the personal interest of Chairman Khrushchev in this matter, as conveyed by your remarks to me on January 26, the United States will continue to keep all aspects of this question under consideration. I am also instructed to inform you that my statements represent the carefully considered views of the United States Government at the highest levels.” (Department of State, Central Files, STR 12-3 USSR)



3 For a report on this part of the conversation, transmitted in telegram 2094 from Moscow, February 25, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XV, pp. 492-493.

4 In telegrams 2096-2099 from Moscow, all February 25, Kohler reported that Gromyko had remained unresponsive on the question of communications links for the U.S. Embassy (telegram 2096; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR, Gromyko Talks); had expressed Soviet disappointment over the U.S. reception of its latest proposals on a nuclear test ban (telegram 2097; Department of State, Central Files, DEF 18-3 Switz (GE)); had said that the Foreign Ministry would reply soon about Embassy building sites (telegram 2098; ibid., BG 6 Moscow); and hoped that the uproar in the United States over the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Cuba would stop (telegram 2099; ibid., POL 27-5 USSR).





300. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Brubeck) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source


Washington, March 1, 1963.

SUBJECT

Improvement of Communications with Embassy Moscow



Gromykoʼs discouraging response to Ambassador Kohlerʼs most recent approach to him on the above subject (Moscow telegram 2096, February 26)1 confirms our earlier impression that the Soviet Government is reluctant to grant our Moscow Embassy a leased teletype line or permission to use a radio transmitter. Soviet reasons may include the probable loss of foreign exchange and fear that a radio transmitter or leased line could enhance our Embassyʼs cryptographic security.

In a telephone call to the Department Bromley Smith inquired about the possibilities for pressure against Soviet interests in the United States in the communications field.2 As far as the Department can discover, the U.S.S.R. has only two vulnerable points. The U.S.S.R. Mission to the United Nations leases a teletype line to Moscow from RCA, and TASS in New York does the same. The Soviet Embassy in Washington does not lease a teletype line but probably sends at least a portion of its communications over the line leased by USSR-UN.

Some weeks ago, the Department undertook informal consultations with the Federal Communications Commission in an effort to determine some appropriate method of acting against these two USSR-leased lines. These consultations suggested that the legislative authority available to the F.C.C. provides ample authority to require an American common carrier to revoke leased circuit privileges under conditions similar to those now existing, even though the carrier is required by its public tariff to make such facilities available to any subscriber. Consequently, on February 8 the Department addressed to the Commission a letter proposing “that the Federal Communications Commission take such steps as are feasible and necessary to condition the license of all international United States carriers so that they, upon notification by the Federal Communications Commission, are authorized to deny service and facilities to any foreign government which does not provide, upon request, equivalent treatment and facilities to the United States Government as is provided to them in this country by the United States carrier.”3

The Commission considered the Departmentʼs request and directed its staff to prepare an appropriate rule to implement that request. Such a rule has now been prepared by the Commissionʼs staff. It is intended to consult with the affected carriers as soon as possible in order to avoid any possible misunderstanding and to secure their maximum cooperation.

As soon as the authority is available, the Department has in mind bringing indirectly or informally to the Soviet Governmentʼs attention the possibility of retaliation against the teletype lines leased by USSR-UN andTASS. It seems possible that this implied threat of retaliation may lead the Soviet Government to grant a leased teletype line to our Moscow Embassy, it is also quite possible that the Soviet Government will continue to refuse.

In the latter event, the Department would wish to reexamine the situation carefully before actually involving retaliation. Action against the TASS line would undoubtedly result in loss of the teletype lines now leased in Moscow by at least two United States news agencies. Action against the line leased by the USSR-UN might well create complications with the United Nations. Moreover, it seems unlikely that the U.S.S.R. would give way before direct threat on an issue where the position is strong and where it does not have anything vital to lose. It also seems undesirable for us to retaliate in unconnected fields, because US-USSR relations are too important and potentially dangerous to be complicated for a relatively minor issue. If we reach that point, the President may wish to consider the possibility of a personal communication to Khrushchev.

J.T. Rogers4



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series,USSR. Secret. The source text bears no drafting information.

1 See footnote 4, Document 299.

2 A record of this telephone conversation, February 26, is in Department of State, Central Files, POL US-USSR.

3 Not found.

4 Rogers signed for Brubeck above Brubeckʼs typed signature.





301. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Thompson) to Secretary of State RuskSource


Washington, March 2, 1963.

SUBJECT

Incoming telegram, Moscow 2124, dated February 27, 19631



With reference to Ambassador Kohlerʼs cable (attached), I think there is indeed some possibility that Khrushchev is in some trouble at home. I think it unlikely that this could be serious enough to lead to his removal, although this cannot be excluded, but it is probably serious enough to mean that he will have to be circumspect in his actions during the next few months.

The concrete signs are few, and all of them could have other explanations; for example, the mildness of his campaign speech,2 in the light of the vicious Chinese attack upon him. The nature of the Chinese attack on him, personally, must mean one of two things—either the Chinese think there is some prospect of bringing about his downfall eventually, or, they think that there is no prospect whatever of patching up their quarrel with the Russians. Another indicator may be the steps taken by some prominent military figures recently to emphasize that Khrushchevʼs role in the Battle of Stalingrad was chiefly that of a morale-builder, rather than a military strategist. The probable explanation of this is that the military are building a backfire against the possibility of Khrushchev again unilaterally cutting back ground forces.

It is well to remember that throughout his Administration, Khrushchev has taken a number of bold actions which although they have, in general, had broad appeal to the masses, have adversely affected influential segments of the regime. Among these might be mentioned those adversely affected by the abolition of the machine tractor stations, military elements who resent Party control, professional members of the Secret Police, the partisans of those who have been purged during the Khrushchev era—particularly Zhukov, professional educators and members of the Soviet elite who resented the educational reform, members of the Leningrad party setup who resent Khrushchevʼs obvious preference for the “southerners,” the members of the disbanded industrial ministries, the old-line Party apparatchiki who resent both Khrushchevʼs internal and external policies, the intellectuals who resent the continuance of Party control, the Jewish community who are aware of Khrushchevʼs anti-Semitism, the industrial managers and technicians who resent the degree of responsibility given the Party for managing the economy, the Stalinists in the Party who are gradually being eliminated, large segments of the youth who resent the slowness in adapting the regime to modern times and, probably most importantly, large numbers of middle and lower Party professionals who are likely to be adversely affected by the recent decision to bifurcate the Party organization into industrial and agricultural committees.

In all, this makes a rather formidable group, and when viewed in the light of Soviet reverses over Cuba and the split with Red China, must mean a fairly high degree of dissatisfaction with Khrushchevʼs leadership. Offsetting this, is the fact that the Presidium and, to a large extent, the Central Committee are packed with Khrushchev followers.

There was some indication in Khrushchevʼs campaign speech that his problems were beginning to get him down when he referred to his pleasure at renewing his faith by contact with the people. Probably the biggest problem facing Khrushchev is how to deal with the agricultural problem and maintain Soviet goals in other fields. His success or failure in dealing with this problem could well determine his ability to maintain his leadership.



* * *



* Source: Department of State,S/AL Files: Lot 67 D 2, Thompson Memos. Secret. Drafted by Thompson. A copy was sent to Bundy on March 4.

1 In this telegram, which was not attached to the source text, the Embassy in Moscow reported three rumors that had begun circulating in the past week regarding Khrushchevʼs status and a further tightening of controls in Soviet cultural and economic fields. (Ibid., Central Files, POL 15-1USSR)

2 For text of Khrushchevʼs February 27 speech see Pravda or Izvestia, February 28, 1963.





302. Editorial Note


On March 5, 1963, Director of Central Intelligence McCone composed a memorandum for the file summarizing his discussions with Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Director Foster during the previous two weeks on the question of a test ban treaty. He noted that Foster had indicated, in response to his questioning, that under certain circumstances the Soviets could test underground and be free of detection. Therefore, McCone wrote, he told Foster he could not support the treaty and, although he would not oppose it since doing so would not be consistent with his position as part of the Presidentʼs administration, he wanted Foster to understand the position he had taken before Congressional committees and in public speeches, press conferences, and TV appearances, occasions on which he had “called for the suspension of only those tests which could be reasonably verified.” McCone also noted that he had reviewed his position with President Kennedy and expressed his doubt that the Senate would approve such a treaty, a view in which the President concurred. For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 653-654.

In an April 8 memorandum, apparently for the record, McCone expressed similar reservations about the verification process but continued: “Of greater importance, however, is the fact that under present political circumstances a test ban between the U.S. USSR, and UK would not, in the final analysis, answer the ‘proliferation’ problem because the Soviets cannot handle the Chinese Communists and we and the British cannot handle the French.” For text, see ibid., pages 668-670.





303. Editorial Note


On March 7, 1963, Presidentʼs Special Representative Bowles wrote in a memorandum to President Kennedy that he was “deeply concerned” about the situation in Vietnam and argued that “we should seek ways to widen our present set of political choices in dealing with the area as a whole and with Vietnam in particular. I believe that the time may be ripe, for instance, for a discreet, noncommittal, and confidential approach to the USSR in which the potential dangers to both Moscow and Washington that the Vietnam impasse contains may be underscored.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume III, pages 136-140.





304. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, March 16, 1963, 2 p.m.

2310. I. There seems to us to have been an unmistakable change in the Soviet posture during the past six weeks, in particular a drawing back from the forthcoming attitude toward East-West problems which followed the Cuban crisis and lasted roughly through my talk with Gromyko on January 26,1 prior to my departure for Washington consultations. The major factor is certainly Moscowʼs preoccupation with the Chinese Communist problem, in the light of the unexpectedly (to Moscow) violent nature of the ChiComsʼ open opposition to Khrushchevʼs “peaceful coexistence” policies and of the increasingly obvious failure of those policies to produce results in terms of Communist objectives. Moscow apparently feels that no accord (test-ban, Germany/Berlin, risk-of-war measures) is in prospect with the West which would not aggravate its difficulties, with the ChiComs and be vulnerable to latterʼs attacks. Resultant doldrums (if not actual chill) in East-West relations seems likely to persist at least until Soviet leadership decides how to deal with ChiComs and starts to do so. This clearly is now priority subject for consideration and debate within leadership here (though we know of no factual basis for rumors of serious opposition to Khrushchev, which are, in any case, recurrent Moscow phenomenon). Process may well be lengthy and outcome presently unpredictable.

II. Following are principal factors leading us to these conclusions: 1. Since my return, I am no longer serenaded by Soviet post-Cuba theme song of need to move ahead toward solution of outstanding East-West problems by “compromise” and “mutual concessions”. Instead I am assailed by accusations United States not interested in settling problems, which by well-known Soviet thought-process of inversion, would indicate loss of interest on their part.

2. Soviets are not only standing pat on test ban and deprecating disarmament possibilities but are adopting dilatory tactics on Germany/Berlin, on which they but recently took initiative.

3. Evolution of Bonn-Paris axis with its implications in military and political fields is causing anxiety and even evoking repeated references in Khrushchevʼs recent speeches to “complicated nature” of international situation—a surprising statement from the No. 1 exponent of historic determinism.

4. Khrushchevʼs recent talks with several foreign diplomats have been disinterested and essentially pro forma in nature.

5. Soviets are increasingly disillusioned with anti-Communist activities of new nations (from Morocco through Arab states to India) to which they looked with such assurance for “peaceful” promotion of their goals and in which they have made, for them, heavy investments.

6. They are increasingly conscious of tendency many Asian-African and Latin American Commie Parties to swing toward ChiCom theses.

7. Even in Eastern Europe they are plagued by persistent economic shortcomings among smaller members of bloc and Soviet inability force pace of economic integration within CEMA.





III. Current tightening up on domestic scene both economically and ideologically certainly not unrelated to stand-still in East-West relations and to conflict with ChiComs but we believe purely internal factors also play substantial role here.

Acutely conscious of Soviet weakness dramatically exposed in Cuban crisis, Soviets have been unable to face up to radical redistribution of resources which would be essential to remove continuing sluggishness from Soviet economy, and especially to solve agricultural problem. Internationally, Khrushchev has thus lost basic tenet of his “peaceful coexistence” theme, i.e., Soviet ability to demonstrate to world superiority by example in economic competition with West. But equally important, Soviet people are not unaware of Khrushchevʼs failure to live up to his repeated promises to improve their lot and his recent public admission regime cannot provide both guns and butter must have been a bitter pill for him to swallow.

Peaceful coexistence with the capitalist world in the ideological field was ruled out by Khrushchev as early as his Novosibirsk speech of October 10, 19592 after visits to USA and China. Current clamp-down in cultural field is thus not a new policy but only first purposeful effort to implement Khrushchevʼs formulation that coexistence only applies outside Soviet borders and is continuation of struggle for Communist world by means short of major war. However, ideological clamp-down has developed one issue of potentially critical internal importance in society like this. Sooner or later, someone was bound to raise question inside the Soviet Union which has so frequently been asked outside: Why Stalinʼs associates did not reveal and take action to stop his criminal terror during his lifetime. It happens that Ehrenburg3 was the one to raise this question in print, so the furor focused on him—for this reason and not primarily because of what he has written otherwise or even because he is a Jew. In reply, Khrushchev chose in his speech of March 84 to state flatly that: “Stalinʼs abuse of power and the facts of his arbitrary rule became known to us only after his death and the exposure of Beria.”5 The baselessness of this assertion could be demonstrated by recourse to the files of any Western Embassy in Moscow covering the Stalin years or even to the world press. However, it must be appreciated that this is the kind of issue which may determine some day who survives or who falls in this country.

IV. As for Khrushchev personally, he has continued to drive himself unmercifully, participating in official ceremonies and receiving visitors to an extent Western heads of government would consider a waste of time. However, in recent weeks he has clearly been a tired man. In delivering his recent election speech and in making the rounds of receptions with the Finnish Prime Minister he displayed little of his normal vivacity and read his speeches in a listless, monotonous voice. At public gatherings, instead of following proceedings with his usual lively attention or engaging in animated, frequently bantering conversations, he has appeared dispirited and had the air of a man overwhelmed by his burdens. However, Khrushchev has demonstrated his resiliency before, is taking the precaution of getting out of town for a while, and may well bounce back with new vigor. In any event, his current depression seems clearly to result less from any difficulties with his colleagues than from his difficulties with a complicated world which no longer fits his earlier confident analysis.

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 USSR. Secret. Repeated to Bonn, London, Paris, Hong Kong, and Geneva.

1 See Document 285.

2 For text of this speech, see Pravda, October 14, 1959.

3 Ilya Ehrenburg, a prominent Soviet writer and protege of Stalin, who was severely criticized in the Soviet press at the end of 1962 and early 1963.

4 For text of this speech, see Pravda or Izvestia, March 10, 1963.

5 Lavrenty P. Beria, Minister of Internal Affairs of the Soviet Union until June 1953.





305. Memorandum by the Central Intelligence AgencySource


>Washington, March 18, 1963.

OCI No. 1096/63

SOVIET POLICIES: THE NEXT PHASE

1. Khrushchev has given the Soviet people a gloomy forecast of their lot and of Soviet prospects abroad for some time to come. His election speech of 27 February1 and subsequent private remarks to Western diplomats suggest that a post-Cuban policy reassessment has been completed and a general line of action decided.

2. The new Soviet course rests on the leadershipʼs “difficult” decisions concerning the serious problem of allocating economic resources. As in 1961 and 1962, Khrushchev has been forced once again to defer any attempt to redistribute resources away from the heavy industries supporting the defense effort to the consumer goods program. He has justified this on the ground of an ominous international situation and the increasing importance of keeping up in the arms race, lest the “balance of power” shift decisively against the USSR. In his speech the Soviet premier acknowledged that the “national economy” is growing more slowly because “reality” dictates a concern for defense requirements involving “enormous sums” and “enormous resources.” In an unusually frank statement Khrushchev said that maintaining this defense program “diminishes, and cannot but diminish” the prospects for the consumer.

3. Khrushchev is still committed to a “balance” between the competing sectors, but for the present the proponents of defense clearly have won the struggle with the advocates of more investment for agriculture and other consumer-oriented sectors. How long this solution will prevail is not clear, but Khrushchev implied a long-term effort was required to improve the USSRʼs military position. The arms race will “obviously continue” for a long period; old armaments will have to be renewed “all the time.” The Soviets cannot afford to underestimate military requirements, as Stalin did in 1941, but must be prepared for the decisive “initial period” of the war, to strike a retaliatory blow “on the very first day.”

4. The general direction of Soviet economic and military policy seems to have been defined, but the precise implications are not clear. The Soviet economy is capable of bearing the defense burden envisaged by Khrushchev, but at the cost of again postponing any substantial rise in living standards and perhaps risking further decline in the future rate of industrial growth. When last yearʼs mediocre agricultural results are considered along with the reaffirmation of defense priority, it is probable that there will not be a significant improvement in living standards in 1963. Beyond the question of consumption, Khrushchevʼs remarks raise the possibility that military programs have been adopted which will affect investment for general industrial expansion and thereby slow general economic growth.

5. Khrushchevʼs statements have an air of finality, but he probably came to these decisions reluctantly; the problem of resource allocation will continue to plague the leadership and it is probable that sooner or later this question will be reopened. Indeed, on 3 March a top planning official published an article repeating Khrushchevʼs earlier argument for a shift of resources away from heavy industry toward consumer-oriented sectors. If consumers react to future disappointments with manifestations of discontent on the scale of 1962, this line may acquire greater force. However, the proponents of defense, having prevailed again in the policy debates, are in a strong position to win future arguments and even put forward new demands.

6. The overall impression given by Khrushchev is that the developments of the past three years have finally brought him to abandon for the indefinite future his 1960 hopes for easing the military burden on the economy through streamlining the military establishment. While we still think Khrushchev may one day reopen the question of force reductions, he clearly does not think it feasible to push any drastic measures of this sort at this time. This speech and his private remarks are clues that the Soviets have found no inexpensive weapons system or low-cost strategy to satisfy their military requirements.

7. That Khrushchev has opted for such a program should have some important implications for Soviet foreign policy. First, it reflects a further decline in confidence and expectations, already increasingly apparent in the last two years and, in our view, an important part of the motivation for the Cuban venture. Second, there is the recognition that a “pause” is required in international affairs, while the Soviets attempt to repair their position. Third, there is the appreciation that real military strength is still the vital ingredient in the balance of power. Fourth, the internal stress on sacrifice tends to militate against any resumption of détente, any imputation of good intentions to the West.

8. The Cuban crisis has, then, been a turning point. In effect, Khrushchev seems to have decided that the “world relation of forces” no longer supports the broad political offensive he initiated in 1957. His fundamental calculations about “contradictions” in the Western alliance, the growth of Soviet economic and military power, the cohesiveness of the socialist camp, and the outcome of the revolution in the underdeveloped world have proved erroneous in some degree. Confronted with these failures, Khrushchev could have chosen to attempt some accommodation with the West, seeking settlements of some contentious issues. This would gain time to concentrate on Bloc and internal problems and to build up Soviet arms, and would probably contribute to the strains in the Western alliance as the Soviet threat seemed to recede. But Khrushchev seems to have ruled out this approach, at least for now. Instead, he has justified his economic and military policy on the basis of a threatening international situation, which suggests that he intends to invoke the “foreign devil.” Thus the present phase is likely to be one in which the atmospherics of propaganda will not be congenial to East-West negotiations.

9. This does not mean, however, that hostile atmospherics will be accompanied by aggressive actions. There is nothing in the lessons of Cuba which warrants an optimistic Soviet view of the risks in forward action. On the contrary, the one point which comes through clearly in Soviet pronouncements is a painful appreciation of US power and determination. Whereas Khrushchev earlier seemed to accept new chances for direct encounters with the US, first in the Congo, then in Laos, Berlin and Cuba, he now appears sobered by the thought that the US was on the verge of attacking Soviet forces in Cuba, and appalled at the options of having to counterattack or accept humiliation. The chances of Khrushchev making a second such dangerous misjudgment have been considerably reduced, even though the pressures which must have contributed to this initial miscalculation remain operative.

Berlin

10. It is only logical that the end of this offensive phase should be symbolized by the shelving of the Berlin issue as a more or less continuous crisis. This is substantially what Khrushchev did in his speech of 16 January.2 His subsequent remarks reflect little optimism about the possibility of a negotiated settlement advantageous enough to justify a demonstrative end to the Berlin crisis. Rather it appears that Berlin will remain as an issue for agitation and propaganda, if only to sustain the general contention that the international situation remains tense. Moreover, without a settlement the Soviets retain the opportunity to make some minor encroachments on the Western position, to make occasional new moves to aggravate current Western differences, or to seek better terms for a settlement if governments change in Bonn or London. Finally, if the current respite is conceived of as a temporary retreat, then Berlin will still be a crucial issue to test Western resolve and prove Soviet power in new circumstances.

Disarmament

11. Talks on disarmament and nuclear testing will probably continue for a time, but there is not likely to be a great Soviet interest in serious dealing on disarmament. It is even possible that the USSR will eventually disrupt the Geneva negotiations, as they did in 1960, when they feel the need for a further demonstration of the ominous state of world affairs. The Soviets are averse to negotiating when they regard their position as inferior, or when they cannot bring outside pressures to bear. The next phase of Soviet disarmament policy, therefore, is likely to be confined to agitation of those partial measures which would inhibit Western defense and disrupt NATO planning for the sharing of nuclear weapons.

12. As to the test ban, the Soviet position has apparently hardened since Khrushchevʼs 19 December letter to President Kennedy.3 Moscow professes to have understood that the US was prepared to settle for 2-3 inspections. But more important than the actual number of inspections were certain implications that a test-ban agreement would have at this time. The present unyielding Soviet stand is based on the judgment that, with the Chinese charging a sell-out and the Soviet populace being called upon for sacrifices, this is no time to encourage hopes for an East-West détente. In addition, the Soviets probably realize that the time has passed when a three-power test ban would pose a real obstacle to the spread of nuclear weapons. Finally, the Soviets may now see the need to maintain a free hand to test again.

The Underdeveloped Areas

13. If the Soviets now expect to make no major breakthrough in Europe, then it will become more important to compensate elsewhere in the world, or at least to make sure that further losses are quickly and effectively contained. The underdeveloped areas will continue to be a crucial arena in the contest with the West, but it is becoming more and more apparent to the Soviets that prospects for further significant gains in any near term are very mixed indeed. The Soviets are finding that it requires full-time effort just to keep the influence they have, let alone develop new opportunities. The Sino-Indian dispute demonstrates that a nonaligned country, when it is subjected to pressures by a communist country, can quickly develop strong pro-Western attitudes; the events in Iraq suggest that even the most extensive Soviet influence is subject to rapid deterioration, while in Guinea a process of erosion of Bloc positions is already well along. All this is at a time when the need to mobilize various international combinations against the West is greater than ever.

14. The experience of the last six or seven years has taught the Soviets that most nationalist leaders are reluctant to bring local communists into their governments and are frequently ready to turn on them with repressions. The Soviets lack promising alternatives, however, since in very few cases are the local parties strong enough to attempt a seizure of power on their own. The USSRʼs recent shrill responses to Iraqi developments and recent denunciations of anti-communist moves in Algeria and Tunisia suggest current frustration on this score. Thus in some cases the Soviets may concentrate upon building local communist strength, even if this risks some injury to their relations with the nonaligned governments. Strong factors in this approach may be the threat of Chinese Communist proselytizing among the parties of underdeveloped areas, and Cuban ambitions to lead the revolution in Latin America.

The Bloc

15. The internal policies enunciated by Khrushchev, and their implications for foreign policy, ought to be cause for some satisfaction in Peiping. The Chinese would welcome Soviet adoption of a harsher tone toward the West and a turning away from serious negotiations. Nevertheless, we doubt that anything better than a superficial and temporary truce could result from the present exchange of proposals for a bilateral meeting. The Chinese editorials of 27 February and 4 March, which followed receipt of the Soviet letter, make it clear that Peiping is determined to break the Soviet hold on the international communist movement; the more the USSR adopts policies which resemble those urged by China, the more China is likely to press further demands (e.g., acceptance of Albania, rejection of Yugoslavia) and assert its own leadership of the world revolution. Thus, even though the Soviets will in the coming period see an advantage in quieting down public contention and may proceed toward a meeting, Chinese terms are so high, and Chinese polemics so fundamental and bitter, that at some point the Soviets must resume the offensive.

Some Factors of Uncertainty

16. Even if Khrushchev has settled on a policy line for the present phase, it could be completely upset by several factors. First, there is the Cuban problem: as long as the Soviets maintain their military presence in some size in Cuba, they are vulnerable to American pressures, which for Castroʼs sake and the sake of their own failing prestige they are obliged to resist. If the Cuban crisis should flare up again, it would overshadow all other East-West issues and have important effects on other aspects of Soviet policy.

17. Second, the decision that the consumer programs must continue to give way to military needs stores up problems inside the Soviet Union which will probably require new and perhaps even more painful reappraisal in the future. There is a wide range of internal issues—de-Stalinization, handling of intellectuals, resource allocation, party- military relations, and the party-state economic reorganization—which may add up to considerable turmoil within the top leadership. These divisions probably have not been fully resolved by recent decisions and the chances are good that Khrushchev will continue to be under conflicting pressures, and that Soviet policy may correspondingly fluctuate.

18. A third source of further policy shifts is developments in the Western alliance. An aggravation of divisions in Europe and between Europe and the US will encourage the Soviets to revive their hopes and pursue more actively the exacerbation of differences in the enemy camp. At a minimum, the present degree of disarray probably already constitutes an argument in Moscow against any substantial “pause” in Soviet policy.

19. Khrushchevʼs present course appears to be a long, hard pull, bound to increase a sense of desperation and frustration. There remains a possibility that these pressures will force the Soviet leaders to reconsider the advantages of some accommodation with the West. But the danger also remains that Khrushchev will again be driven to break out of this entanglement by some audacious move abroad, even though this might appear risky or foolish.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 USSR. Secret. The source text was attached to a memorandum from Ray S. Cline, Deputy Director of Intelligence, to Rusk, March 18, which briefly summarized its contents. A copy was sent to Bundy on March 28.

1 See footnote 2, Document 301.

2 For text of this speech, see Pravda or Izvestia, January 17, 1963.

3 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, pp. 234-237.





306. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Thompson) to Secretary of State RuskSource


Washington, March 21, 1963.

SUBJECT

CIA memorandum dated March 18, 1963, OCI No. 1096/631



The CIA paper entitled “Soviet Policies: The Next Phase,” states, in summary form, some of the problems and appraisals which an interagency group, under the leadership of S/P, has been working on for some time, in a more extended treatment. The CIA paper is a useful one, and I have only a few comments, as follows:

While there are many signs that the Soviets have decided to maintain, and possibly increase, the heavy allocation of resources to the military sector, I believe we should keep a sharp eye out to see whether this does in fact prove to be the case. The Soviets are quite capable of deliberate deception on this point.

Paragraph 10, which deals with Berlin, appears to ignore the fact that the Soviets have reopened this question, and it is too early to conclude that this is merely an effort to keep the question alive.

The statement in paragraph 11 that “There is not likely to be a great Soviet interest in serious dealing on disarmament” may be true in the sense that the Soviets do not consider the time propitious, or the West sufficiently interested to make meaningful agreement possible, but everything in the Soviet situation points to the fact that they should have a genuine interest in real disarmament, and I believe that this is the case.

In paragraph 7, it is stated “There is the recognition that a pause is required in international affairs, while the Soviets attempt to repair their position.” While Soviet foreign policy does seem to be on dead center, I suspect this pause is due more to Khrushchevʼs internal situation, and the influence of foreign developments on that internal situation, than to the foreign developments themselves, or to the military situation.

In general, I am inclined to question the implication of the paper that the Soviets are going to stand still in foreign affairs while they build up their military strength. Apart from the fact that by hardening bases and building more atomic submarines the Soviets can increase their second strike capability, I doubt very much that they anticipate changing the correlation of military forces to their advantage to a degree which would enable them to undertake adventures in the foreign affairs field which they cannot do now. On the other side of the coin, I think that whenever Khrushchevʼs internal situation is improved we can expect further Soviet moves, and possibly radical ones, in the field of foreign affairs.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 USSR. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Thompson; copies were sent to Kaysen and Cline. According to another copy this memorandum was included in the Presidentʼs weekend reading for March 23-24. ( Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR)

1 Document 305.





307. Memorandum by the Ambassador at Large (Thompson)Source


Washington, March 25, 1963.

LARGE-DIAMETER PIPE

While the wisdom of our original decision attempting to prevent the export of large-diameter pipe to the Soviet Union is debatable, the manner in which the problem has developed makes it clear that failure to hold the line now would be highly damaging to our interests. The pressure we have put upon the Germans, Italians, and Japanese, would probably not successfully be repeated in another case if the British failed to hold the line on large-diameter pipe. Failure could seriously affect NATO cooperation in general and would be certain to have an adverse effect upon relations between Great Britain and the other countries concerned, particularly Germany. Moreover, I should think there would be serious repercussions in the United States, particularly in Congress. It would seem advisable not only to make a strong effort to persuade the British to hold the line, but also to use this incident as a basis for exploring with the British our widely different concepts of trade relations with the USSR.

So far as the original decision is concerned, we can make a good case on military grounds for our policy. Transportation is probably the weakest link in the Soviet military setup and the completion of an oil pipeline to Central Europe and the branch line to the Baltic States would greatly simplify Soviet supply problems, release rolling stock, and increase the capacity of their railroads to handle other traffic. Oil exports constitute one of the Soviet Unionʼs biggest earners of hard foreign exchange and is used by them to pay for imports, many of which contribute to their military potential.

Because of the failure of Soviet agriculture, the leveling off of growth rates, manpower shortages, increased cost of military hardware and space programs, the Soviet Union now has an acute problem in determining the allocation of resources. While they can undoubtedly manufacture the necessary large-diameter pipe themselves, failure to acquire large quantities from abroad will undoubtedly slow down the completion of the pipelines. Moreover, in a highly centralized planned economy like that of the Soviet Union, with its traditional overcommitment of resources, the shift to pipe construction will require extensive changes in economic plans and will probably have a considerable, although temporary, adverse effect upon the development of the economy.

The British argue that a fat Russian is a good Russian, and that it is to our interests to have a continued rise in the Soviet standard of living. While I believe there is something to this argument, there are several factors which should be taken into consideration. One of them is that it does not necessarily follow that increased trade will, in fact, result in increased output of consumers goods, but may in present circumstances merely facilitate further arms expenditures, foreign aid programs, or other objectives adverse to our interests. Furthermore, even if one accepts the British concept, the question of timing is of great importance. Since the death of Stalin, the Soviet Union has been evolving in a direction favorable to our interests. It is important that this process develop far beyond the point it has reached before the Soviet Union is strong enough to devote large sums to foreign aid or other programs to further the spread of communism. We must also keep in mind that should Khrushchev disappear, or be persuaded to change his current policies, it is quite possible that the Soviet Union could suddenly change over to the policies advocated by Communist China.

One argument used by the British that is largely phony is that trade offers an opportunity for contacts and for the development of friendship and understanding. Since the Soviets, however, in general, prevent contacts between their end-users and foreign exporters, and handle trade matters in a few central government offices, this is not, in fact, the case.

Another argument is that our policies have caused the Soviets to develop production capacity in areas which they would not otherwise do. This is, of course, true to some extent, but this has, of course, been accomplished only at the expense of slowing down development in other areas.

It is not suggested that we should follow a deliberate policy of preventing all trade with the Soviet Union, but in cases such as large- diameter pipe, where there is a strong strategic element involved, I believe our decision was sound.

Another fine point to keep in mind is that Ambassador Kohler, in discussing this matter in Moscow, pointed out that there was a relationship between this problem and the general state of US/Soviet relations, particularly on such matters as the Berlin problem. It would be particularly unfortunate if we failed to hold the line at a time when the Soviets seem to be veering toward a tougher policy.



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Regional Security Series,NATO, General, Pipe Embargo. Secret. Drafted by Thompson.





308. Editorial Note


On March 26, 1963, Secretary of State Rusk and Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin resumed discussions on Berlin in accord with the understanding reached in Moscow between Ambassador Kohler and Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko. In a discussion with French President De Gaulle on April 8, Rusk characterized the March 26 meeting as having produced nothing new; Dobrynin “had nothing to offer beyond the repetition of theUN suggestion which they had made months before—even before the October crisis.” A further Rusk-Dobrynin meeting on April 12 again produced no new proposals. For texts of memoranda of Ruskʼs two conversations with Dobrynin and his conversation with De Gaulle, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XV, pages 497-509.





309. Highlights From the Secretary of Stateʼs Policy Planning MeetingSource


Washington, March 26, 1963.

SUBJECT

S/P Paper Entitled: “More on the ‘Khrushchev at Bay’ Thesis”1



The paper under consideration at the dayʼs meeting was described as an interim product of an S/P project looking toward a post-Khrushchev Russia and the before and after policy implications for the US. The need for an interim review flowed from a series of developments which Embassy Moscow, INR and CIA have been reporting that suggest a quiet but deep crisis is underway in theUSSR and that a sticky and difficult agenda is immediately before the Soviet leadership. The high and growing costs of various Soviet cold war undertakings and commitments, together with prolonged failure to secure worthwhile pay-offs from these, and frictions and conflicts within communist ranks pose serious dilemmas for Khrushchev. He needs badly to score a quick success. If not this, then the leadership will have to make a difficult choice between moderating its policies or girding its loins for a long hard pull, the length and end of which cannot be foreseen.

We can assume that some very basic staff work is being done on an urgency basis in the Kremlin. It consequently behooves us to be unusually alert regarding both dangers and opportunities. The paper emphasizes the importance of our continuing to block communist expansion whether by military or other means in Europe or elsewhere, as well as to counter effectively Soviet efforts to gain significant advantages in the underdeveloped countries. The paper also underscores an earlier concern that the Soviets may be seeking a “quick fix” through an armaments development that would give them, if not a hard military advantage, at least a great psychological boost a la Sputnik. It is of paramount importance that we safeguard fully against this.

Khrushchevʼs great need is not a simple increase in military strength. He has it in his power to get this, despite the costs. But military strength in itself is not the objective. The objective is the attainment of concrete political results. But this raises the question of risk. If Khrushchev wants to move, he must be willing to incur greater risks. The basic issue that faces him is the degree of risk the USSR should run on behalf of communist objectives. If the Kremlin should really “go rough,” we could only conclude a decision had been reached to step up the risk rate. In that case, we had better be set to batten down the hatches.

Conversely, we should recognize the possibility of a move in an entirely different direction. The decision might be to reduce the risks and costs that are bearing down so heavily. For this reason, the paper urges that we keep open lines of communications and take other steps that would lead the leadership to see this alternative course as both feasible and attractive.2

The ensuing discussion centered around the following major points: 1. The importance of periodically reviewing our basic assumptions regarding the Soviet leadership. The timeliness of the S/P paper was generally recognized. We cannot afford, it was said, to lock ourselves into fixed positions as to either the milieu in which the leadership operates or the range of policy choices to which it may be led or forced to resort. We must recognize that the USSR is also subject to change, possibly quite rapid and far-reaching change. No more important matter can be before us than that of discerning and properly appraising the possibility of shifts in the purposes and direction of the leadership. We have been taken by surprise in the past, and often at great costs. We also have doubtless missed some opportunities.

2. The seriousness of the resources pinch. Question was raised as to whether the S/P paper did not exaggerate the significance of the decline in the Soviet economic growth rate. Assumptions of difficulties incident to this were central to the entire thesis of the paper. It should not be forgotten that despite the drop in the percentage rate, a tremendous absolute increase in production is still being effected each year and will certainly continue throughout the foreseeable future. Illustrative is a recently published report on plan fulfillment in Armenia. In every area of economic activity in that republic, extremely impressive gains have been registered in the past year just as they have been in the preceding several years. We need to be cautious when making judgments about the limitations that the slowing down of the growth rate places on the Soviet leaders. Granted economic problems and difficulties exist. These are most serious in agriculture. There have also been exaggerated expectations with regard to automation, something that has led to some important shortfalls in plan fulfillment. But we should not place too great reliance on these adverse factors. The tremendous absolute increases will enable a steady expansion of established programs and the addition of new ones. The way is also open for the regime to shortcut the practices of the US and other western countries in satisfying the demands of the people for a better life for themselves. A case in point is projected development of satellite belts around cities. Here something quite striking—in the eyes of both Russians and foreigners—can be done cheaply.

That Soviet economic expansion continues impressive was generally agreed. It was argued, however, that economic expansion is not inconsistent with a mounting resources pinch. The key factor is that decline in the growth rate is paralleled by an increase in the requirements rate. The resources available to the regime are heavily over-committed. Something has to give somewhere. Quite evidently there are real—and growing—problems of resource allocation. While this is not the only problem facing the regime, it does make all other problems more difficult.



3. How the Soviet leadership may view the situation. According to S/Pʼs analysis, it was pointed out, Khrushchev and his associates have fallen into a “no-win” situation. Can we assume that they see their problems and difficulties as we do? Would it not be a worthwhile exercise to try to draft a defense of Khrushchevʼs policies as he himself might draft it for presentation to his colleagues? What could he say to justify his course, and to still concern over the future? Evidently, he would have to acknowledge that much had gone wrong. The turn in Iraq, for example, would need explaining. What bright spots could he point to? Obviously, he is being confronted by a need to explain and justify in consequence of Chinese communist attacks. There may also be criticism at home. Someone in the Department should attempt to put himself in Khrushchevʼs shoes and draft a reply to his critics. A solid job here could contribute importantly to our understanding.

4. Desirability of the US utilizing communist-generated crises to add to pressures operating on the Soviets. One of the policy recommendations of theS/P paper was that in cases where theUSSR—or communists responsive to theUSSR—were attempting in particular areas to gain advantage at US or allied expense through crisis mongering or some other device, the US should deliberately seek to reverse the tactic and use the situation to put in jeopardy a Soviet-communist interest, or at least to increase steadily the costs of the “crisis operation” for the communist side. The paper made specific reference in this connection to (a) shifting the emphasis in future negotiations on West Berlin to the problem of Berlin as a whole and perhaps to the over-all German problem; (b) countering any increased effort of the communists in Laos and South Viet-Nam, with moves that would threaten North Viet-Nam, and (c) increasing the costs and risks to the USSR of Soviet hegemony over Cuba.

Serious question was raised to practicability and desirability of such a tactic on our part. In the case of Berlin, for example, other considerations than the simple one of increasing pressures on the USSR have to be taken into account. Experience of the last several years has shown little money is to be made from trying to tie Berlin in with an over-all German settlement. In Southeast Asia, we have to face up to what our realistic capabilities are to extend the conflict into the “communist garden.” Unless we are prepared to assume heavy costs to get at North Viet-Nam, we might find it far better to continue to concentrate on containing communist efforts within Laos and South Viet-Nam proper. We need, of course, to study the feasibility of the alternative. But we have to take into account possible reaction and the problems this would present to us. There is also question as to whether an extension of the area of conflict, particularly action aimed at Hanoi, would really be an effective means of getting at the USSR.



5. The problem of safeguarding against a Soviet military breakthrough. Uncertainty was voiced as to whether we are paying sufficient attention to what the Soviets may be able to accomplish in either a strict military sense or psychologically through some sort of weapons advance. This was characterized as perhaps the most important matter raised by the paper. Two possibilities were open: an effective anti-missile missile system, and an impressive space weapon. With regard to the latter, we may have become prisoners of our own thinking. We are fond of saying bombs in space would not be a good first strike weapon. But they would be superb for a second strike. In any event, their psychological impact could be terrific. This whole business needs thinking through again without the hindrance of fixed preconceptions.

A counterview held that military men almost without exception discount the importance of weapons in space. It was nevertheless recognized that close attention should be given this matter. We should look at all possibilities with a completely open mind. It would be well, in particular, if arrangements could be made for a thorough briefing on the subject for those participating in this discussion.



6. The problem of the underdeveloped countries. It was felt that we also have special need to increase our alertness with regard to the underdeveloped countries. The Soviets, as the paper noted, had so far not scored any notable successes. But in several instances—Iraq for example—the decision could have well gone in favor of the communists and we would have been unable to do anything about it. The underdeveloped countries still offer the best opportunity for Soviet gains that would enable a breakout from the bind of the moment. We are far from being on safe ground in this area. India remains marginal as does a number of other countries. We cannot afford to rest on the breaks we have so far enjoyed, as these can easily prove transitory. We must stay on the track and increase rather than decrease emphasis and effort. Much more needs to be said on this subject than is in the paper being considered. The Soviets appear to be working with the long term in mind. In Africa, for example, they are evidently concentrating on developing cadres for long range use. Assume that by the end of the decade they should have several African countries locked up, Latin America on the go, plus India, Burma and Pakistan. Would this not serve to offset any immediate problems and clinch Soviet confidence and resolve re the future? If we are to succeed in holding the Soviets in check, no area of operations is more important than the underdeveloped countries.

7. The problem of influencing desirable policy choices of the Soviet leadership. To frustrate the Soviet leadership in its various designs was recognized as a necessary objective. However, a word of warning was thought needed. Frustration can be a dangerous thing to play with. Under certain circumstances it might produce results the exact opposite of what we want. If the Soviets continue to find their low risk policies leading nowhere but deeper and deeper into a mire of difficulties, they might decide to shift to high risk policies.

For this reason, it was stressed, it is particularly important that we provide an escape hatch that might appeal to the Soviet regime but would still not be inimical to our own interests. We should be sure that our efforts at frustration do not include moves threatening to Soviet national interests. We should continually seek areas of agreement. A test ban treaty, if it can be worked out, would help. So would a “no bombs in space” agreement. We might also seek more systematically to play upon the strong Soviet desire for respectability.





Any agreement between the regime and the US was believed likely to have a strong and favorable impact on the Russian people. The Russian people want above all else to avoid a nuclear war. They have no interest in the spread of communism. They are opposed to expenditures on behalf of underdeveloped countries. Their main concern is an improvement in their own standard of living. They are basically friendly toward the US. Any agreement with the US would be associated in their minds with greater opportunities for a better life for themselves. This means that even an “atmospherics” agreement might yield important dividends in the way of getting the ball rolling in the desired direction. One agreement would generate popular pressures for another, and so on.

Question was raised about a possible change in our trade policy toward theUSSR. Have we really subjected this policy to the type of review it should have in light of existing circumstances? How important are our restrictive measures against the background of a possible nuclear exchange? How effective are they in view of the nearly $4 billion of trade between our European allies and bloc countries? We need to take a hard new look at this whole question.

A point that should especially be taken into account is the impact of our policy on Soviet attitudes. The Soviet leaders have always shown a special sensitivity over our trade restrictions. This goes back to the days of Stalin and extends to our present efforts re wide diameter pipe. We are approaching a deep split with our allies over pipe sales and probably in the end will not be able to keep the Soviets from getting what they want. Meanwhile, we will have given more ammunition to those of the Soviet leaders who would argue the US is “irreconcilably hostile” to the USSR and its interests as a matter of principle.

Soviet sensitivity over US trade restrictions was seen as deriving from several factors: a resentment over the slight to Soviet prestige and respectability; Soviet belief in the superior quality of American products; faith that with increased trade US businessmen would influence the government favorably toward the USSR.

Improvement in trade relations was viewed as one of the best possible means of moving the Soviet regime along the revisionist road. Rapprochement in the Soviet mind is in fact more closely identified with trade than anything else. From our own standpoint, economic advantage would flow from expanded trade, although there would also be disadvantages in consequence of the improvement that would follow for the Soviet competitive position. This last might be especially serious in the case of oil and civil aviation where Soviet competition is already strong and where adverse political consequences can easily be produced. Aside from other factors that should be taken into account in reviewing our restrictive policies, emphasis as placed on the desirability of increasing Soviet economic dependence on the US. This has probably been given too little weight in the past.

Follow up action suggested by the discussion: a. Preparation of a closed meeting statement by Khrushchev [Kennedy?] evaluating the present Soviet situation and outlook.

b. A briefing review at an early Planning Meeting of possibilities of the Soviets gaining important military and/or political advantages in weapons development or deployment.

c. A comprehensive review of US policies re trade with the USSR and the satellites.





* * *



* Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Chron. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text.

1 A copy of this 72-page, double-spaced paper is ibid., Central Files, POL US-USSR. It states that it takes as a point of departure the summary conclusions reached in Document 228.

2 The S/P paper had been discussed at an NSC Planning Group lunch on March 19 where Rostow posed the problem in terms of Khrushchev being either forced “to withdraw into modern revisionism or revert to a Stalinist hard line.” Robert Komer of the NSC Staff, in a March 19 memorandum to Kaysen reported that most of those present at lunch believed it would be a combination of both. Thompson pointed out the Soviet dilemma in the allocation of resources and stated he thought it possible, though not probable, Khrushchev might run another military bluff. ( Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR)





310. Editorial Note


In a message to British Prime Minister Macmillan, March 28, 1963, President Kennedy discussed prospects for a nuclear test ban: “It seems to me that we have to consider the chances of our successfully engaging the Soviet Union in serious negotiations against the background of what is now evidently going on in Moscow. Khrushchev appears to be maneuvering either to realign the policies of Communist China and the Soviet Union or to place the blame on Peiping if Soviet-Chinese relations cannot be repaired. At the same time, Khrushchev has had to confront the Soviet people with the prospect of no improvement in their material well-being because of continuing heavy expenditures resulting from military requirements. In addition, there seems to be another internal bureaucratic reorganization in process. Khrushchev probably has too many problems on his hands right now to give the test ban the attention it deserves.” However, the President continued, “this does not mean that we should drop all conversations with the Soviets on the test ban question.” On non-proliferation, Kennedy was also somewhat pessimistic: “The Soviet attitude towards the multilateral force has stiffened to the point now where the Soviet Union gives evidence of unwillingness to adhere to a non-dissemination declaration of the type which we have been proposing.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 659-661.





311. Editorial Note


A memorandum on the situation in Laos, prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency on March 29, 1963, commented that “the Soviet Union continues to exercise caution in respect to Laos. Moscow appears content with the Geneva settlement and confident that the weaknesses of the coalition government offer sufficient possibilities for ultimate Communist victory through infiltration and subversion to make unnecessary the risks of intervention by Western powers in the event of a renewal of hostilities. The USSR does not appear to have utilized fully its limited leverage in Laos [to ensure fulfillment of the Geneva agreements], although it probably would seek to restrain the Pathet Lao from any course that Soviets thought might lead to escalation into broader hostilities.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XXIV, pages 948-952.





312. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource


Washington, April 1, 1963.

SUBJECT

Conclusion of a Civil Air Agreement with the USSR



You have asked whether this would be a good time for us to go ahead with the air agreement with the Soviet Union.1 After careful consideration, we do not believe that we should proceed now to sign this agreement.

You will recall that at the time the bilateral air agreement was initialed (August 21, 1961) we refused to sign it on the grounds that the international situation made it undesirable to conclude such an agreement. There have been no developments in the international situation which in our view make it any more desirable to sign this agreement now. In addition, a new factor has entered into the picture since August 1961. During the past year and a half the Soviets have been making a concerted effort to extend their civil air lines to and through the underdeveloped countries of the world. We have resisted this Soviet effort, with some success. Our success has been greatest in hampering Soviet efforts to establish a convenient air link with Cuba. The conclusion of the Civil Air Agreement between the United States and the USSR would seriously impair our ability, which is in any case limited, to persuade underdeveloped countries, especially in Africa and Latin America, to refuse overflight and other air rights being sought by the Soviets. Before we sacrifice this position, we should obtain something from the Soviets in return. In our opinion, there would have to be some development representing a major step in improving our relations with the Soviet Union before the air agreement would be in our interest. The conclusion of a nuclear test ban agreement or the achievement of a modus vivendi over Berlin would represent such a development. It might then be argued that the air agreement would give added impetus to further improvements in our relations with Moscow and lead to further agreements.

The main arguments in favor of concluding the Air Agreement with the USSR now are (1) that it would improve the international atmosphere and might encourage a more forthcoming attitude on the part of the Soviets on more important issues and (2) that it would facilitate the expansion of Soviet tourism in the United States which is restricted among other reasons by a shortage of foreign exchange. The first of these arguments is of doubtful validity. The Soviets give every appearance of being in a period of reassessment and of having yet to decide what their attitude and policies toward the West should be. We do not feel that at this juncture our willingness to sign the air agreement, which is of relatively minor significance, would tip the scales in the minds of the Soviet leadership, beset as it is with such weighty problems as the Chinese Communist challenge. Indeed, we would be in an awkward position if, after we signed the agreement, the Soviets adopted a harder line toward us as some internal evidence suggests may be in the offing.

DR



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, AV 4 US-USSR. Secret. Drafted by Guthrie and cleared in draft by Thompson, the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Philip H. Trezise, M, and TRC. Attached to the source text was a memorandum from Tyler to Rusk, recommending that he sign the memorandum to the President and noting that similar considerations influenced U.S. thinking in regard to pursuing a U.S.-USSR consular convention.

1 This was done in a memorandum from the President, March 29, which reads: “Would this be a good time for us to go ahead with the air agreement with the Soviet Union?” (Ibid.)





313. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Thompson) to Secretary of State RuskSource


Washington, April 3, 1963.

I am becoming increasingly concerned that the Soviets may be tempted to shoot down one of our many flights along the periphery of the Soviet Union. While I have been clearing plans for such flights, I am not in a position to weigh the advantages with the risks involved, but they seem to me to be far more numerous than is justified by the present political situation. I would doubt that the Soviets will use force against any flight which does not actually cross into Soviet territory, pending Khrushchevʼs return to Moscow. I think, thereafter, there are two factors that might cause them to attack a plane which came close but did not actually violate Soviet territory.

The first of these factors is what I suspect to be the frustration of the Soviet military over what they probably consider as a series of humiliations. These include the forced withdrawal of missiles from Cuba, the intensive and close surveillance of Soviet shipping, buzzing of Soviet ships, firm actions of Western military forces in Berlin, continual overflights of Soviet installations in Cuba (obviously many of these actions were brought on by Soviet initiatives, but this would not necessarily affect their reaction) etc.

The other factor is that Soviet foreign policy appears to be on dead center and should the Soviet Government decide on a harder course, I suspect that at least some of the Soviet military would press for action against these flights.

I understand that at some time in the past a survey was made attempting to assess the value of these flights against the risks involved, but I wonder if a new assessment is not in order.



* * *



* Source: Department of State,S/AL Files: Lot 67 D 2, Thompson Memos. Top Secret. Drafted by Thompson and also sent to Ball, Deputy Under Secretary of State Johnson, and Thomas Hughes, the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research.





314. Editorial Note


In a memorandum to the President, April 3, 1963, Attorney General Kennedy reported that he had received that afternoon from Ambassador Dobrynin a lengthy “talking paper” that was “ostensibly to me from the Ambassador” but in fact “from Khrushchev to the President.” The Attorney General indicated that he had returned the paper to Dobrynin because “it was so insulting and rude.” However, he summarized its major points in his memorandum to the President. Regarding the test ban, he stated that Khrushchev wanted it “clearly understood” that “the Soviet Union will not go above their offer of two or three inspection sites. There was absolutely no need to go above that figure as our [U.S.] scientists had clearly demonstrated.” The United States, Khrushchev asserted further, was “trying to obtain a greater number in order to commit espionage. In these efforts we were treating the Soviet Union as inferiors—as if we could dictate to them. The United States had better learn that the Soviet Union was as strong as the United States and did not enjoy being treated as a second class power.” Regarding Cuba, Khrushchev stated that “the continued pressure on the Soviet Union for the withdrawal of troops from Cuba was not going to be effective.” He claimed, however, that the Soviets “had already withdrawn twice as many troops as the largest number that had appeared in the newspapers here in the United States.” For text of both Kennedyʼs memorandum and Khrushchevʼs message, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VI, pages 250-265.





315. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Thompson) to Secretary of State RuskSource


Washington, April 6, 1963.

SUBJECT

Memorandum of Conversation Between Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, USSR, and Ambassador Llewellyn E. Thompson, Department of State, Saturday, 10:00 a.m., April 6, 1963



I explained to the Ambassador that the postponement of the talks on Berlin was entirely due to the Secretaryʼs heavy schedule and said the Secretary thought that in view of the very short time he would have, it would be better to wait until they could have a more thorough discussion. When I started to describe what the Secretaryʼs schedule had been in the last few days, the Ambassador interrupted to say he was well aware of this and completely understood the reason for postponement.

I then went on to say that he had occasionally asked for personal advice from me on various questions, and that today I would like to consult him on the same personal basis. I said I had been informed of the conversation he had had a few days ago1 and that it seemed clear from this and from other indications that misunderstanding between our two countries was increasing and seemed to me to be quite serious. I had been considering recommending to the Secretary and the President that the President send some high-level official in whom he had complete confidence and who was privy to his thinking to see the Chairman for an informal talk with the objective of clearing away as much of this misunderstanding as possible. I said this, of course, did not indicate any lack of confidence in Ambassador Kohler, but that this sort of thing could only be done by someone who was in close contact with the President. I did not wish to make such a recommendation if it would not be helpful, and I found it difficult to make up my own mind. I said that I realized that on both sides there were difficult problems just now and that I could understand that the timing might be awkward for both of us.

Dobrynin said, without hesitation, that he thought it would be a very good idea. He pressed very hard to know what specific person I had in mind. I tried to put him off by saying simply that it should be a high-level official who was in a position to know what was in the Presidentʼs mind on various problems. He continued to press for a name by way of illustration and I finally mentioned the Secretary, the Attorney General, and Mr. Harriman. I had previously mentioned the Laos problem and said that it could be that developments would be such that a visit by Mr. Harriman, ostensibly on this problem, would be easiest to explain. I said I thought that if the Secretary should go, there would have to be some problem that could be dealt with successfully. I said that if it were the Attorney General, there would have to be some excuse, and I mentioned the possibility of visiting the Leningrad and Moscow Universities where we had students, and pointed out that the Attorney General had made previous trips abroad particularly in connection with universities and youth problems. I inquired if he knew of any event coming up in the Soviet Union which might be used in this connection. Dobrynin inquired about timing, and I said I thought this would depend upon developments, but I should have thought some time within a month. He repeated he thought it would be an excellent idea for someone to go and would think about the matter and let me know if he had any further thoughts.

I also told the Ambassador that I understood the President would probably send Mr. Khrushchev a personal letter, probably some time next week.2

I then asked the Ambassador what his guess was as to what particular issues were bothering the Chairman. He mentioned first the Cuban affair and said that he was sure, from his own experience in Moscow, that they would interpret the émigré raids as having been condoned, if not actually run, by the United States Government. He did not mean necessarily the President, but perhaps one of the other agencies. He said he thought this had been interpreted as a deliberate effort to embarrass the Soviet Union. He also said that outside the Government, particularly in the Foreign Office, people in Moscow did not distinguish between statements made by prominent Senators, for example, and responsible members of the Executive Branch.

Dobrynin referred to the Soviet troop withdrawals and the statements by Senator Keating and others which made it look as though the Soviets were withdrawing under pressure. He said that from having attended meetings in Moscow, he knew that they were particularly sensitive to any thought that they were being pushed around or yielding to pressure, and said that while our Government might react the same way, he thought they were particularly prone to this in Moscow. I said I could assure him that while I could not speak for every individual, I knew that no agency of the Government condoned these raids, much less connived at them, and referred to the vigorous action we were taking to stop them. The Ambassador indicated he understood this.

The Ambassador then referred to the disarmament discussions and particularly the negotiations on a test ban. He said he had actually seen the telegram which Kuznetsov had sent reporting his conversation with Dean, who referred to two to four inspections,3 but stressed the importance of an acceptance in principle. He said he was sure that the Soviet Government and he himself had been convinced that the Chairmanʼs letter accepting two or three inspections had solved the matter, and that when we had come back with a proposal of eight, the Soviet Government considered it had been led into a trap, and that this had been a deliberate effort to play games with them. I pointed out that Mr. Dean had categorically denied having made the statement attributed to him and, quite apart from this, I could assure him that there had never been any thought of our agreement to any such number. The Ambassador replied he was not discussing this but simply trying to explain the reaction in Moscow. He added that when he had delivered the Chairmanʼs letter4 to the Attorney General, the latter remarked that this was fine, and the Ambassador had been convinced himself that the matter was settled.

In this connection, the Ambassador referred to the readiness with which the Chairman had agreed to receive Norman Cousins,5 who had told the Ambassador that he had seen the President, that he had no mandate whatever from him, but would like to talk to Khrushchev about testing in order to explain the thinking of the American people, as well as what he understood was in the mind of the President and other officials. I said I hoped he understood that Norman Cousins was not particularly close to the President nor the Secretary and probably not in a position to give any authoritative account of their thinking, although he was a man of good will. The Ambassador said he thoroughly understood this and had explained it to the Chairman. He merely cited it as indicative of the Chairmanʼs interest in trying to understand our thinking and reach agreement on this problem.

The Ambassador asked me what subject would be covered in the Presidentʼs letter, and I said I did not know, but imagined it would cover more than one subject as there were a number of serious issues between us.



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR, Dobrynin Talks. Top Secret. Also sent to Ball and Bundy.

1 See Document 308.

2 See Document 316.

3 See Document 274.

4 See Document 314.

5 See Document 295.





316. Editorial Note


In an April 11, 1963, letter to Chairman Khrushchev, President Kennedy addressed the issue of a test ban. Trying to resolve the continuing disagreement over whether Arthur Dean had told a Soviet representative that the United States could accept as few as two to four on-site inspections per year in the Soviet Union (see Document 274), he assured Khrushchev that no U.S. representative had made any such statement. At the same time, however, he said that he had “respect for your representatives, too, and so believe that there was an honest misunderstanding on this point.” He once again tried to convince Khrushchev that the multilateral nuclear force being considered by the United States and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization would not be a violation of the principle of nonproliferation, for “no such force could ever be used without the consent of the United States. The concept of this force is therefore exactly opposite to that of independent national nuclear forces.” Kennedy also offered to send a senior personal representative to discuss these and other matters with Khrushchev. “The object would not be formal negotiations, but a fully frank, informal exchange of views, arranged in such a way as to receive as little attention as possible.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VI, pages 265-268.

President Kennedy and Prime Minister Macmillan conveyed their views on the test ban issue to Khrushchev in a joint letter dated April 15. The letter reviewed problems and progress in the negotiations, concluded that “we have reached an impasse,” and proposed “private tripartite discussions in whatever seemed the most practical way,” for example through “our chief representatives at Geneva” or through “very senior representatives who would be empowered to speak for us and talk in Moscow directly with you.” On April 24 Ambassador Kohler reported to the Department in telegram 2719 that he had presented the Kennedy-Macmillan letter to Khrushchev. “Khrushchevʼs reception was almost one of disinterest.” He said it contained “nothing new,” reiterated “that Germany was the key to everything and that the nuclear test ban really had no importance,” and expressed regret “for having made mistake of offering three inspections.” For text of the Kennedy-Macmillan letter and Kohlerʼs telegram, see ibid., volume VII, pages 676-678 and 685-686.

Khrushchev replied to Kennedyʼs April 11 letter on April 29 in a long message that concluded by accepting Kennedyʼs offer to send a senior personal representative to Moscow for informal discussions. Khrushchev answered the Kennedy-Macmillan letter on May 8, expanding on his initial reaction to Kohler. He claimed again that the German peace settlement, not the test ban, was the key to “lessening international tension” and repeated the usual arguments for Soviet opposition to on-site inspections. He characterized the Kennedy-Macmillan proposal to send high-level representatives to Moscow as a “proposal to continue haggling over inspections, but at a higher level,” but he nevertheless agreed to receive them. For text of both letters, see ibid., volume VI, pages 271-286.





317. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, April 19, 1963.

Top Soviet Leadership

There continue to be indications that Khrushchev has been on the defensive on some controversial issues and that his detractors within the party are growing bolder. The extent, if any, to which his political control has been affected remains unclear, however, and the differences do not yet appear serious enough to impair the normal functioning of the government.

The treatment of the Soviet May Day slogan on Yugoslavia seemed to lend substance to the recent spate of rumors about troubles in the Kremlin. When the slogan was first published on 8 April, it made no reference to “building socialism.” On 11 April, however, Yugoslavia was moved into the category of countries “building socialism” and was thus ranked equally with all other Communist bloc countries, including China and Albania. The change was obviously aimed at Peiping and emphasized that Khrushchev and his followers will not modify their doctrinal position that Yugoslavia is “socialist”—a fundamental point of contention in the Sino-Soviet polemic.

The original omission suggests a difference of opinion on this question which resulted in the use of the same formula concerning Yugoslavia which has been employed since 1958. Alternatively, the original slogan may have been published at the instigation of some leaders who saw in Khrushchevʼs absence on vacation an opportunity to indicate their disagreement with some of his views.

Recent signs that former Defense Minister Zhukov may soon be rehabilitated also suggest political maneuvering. Discussions of his past role began to vary in February, and several military articles have since mentioned his wartime contributions in a favorable context. Most authors, however, have reiterated charges that Zhukov committed military blunders and followed an “anti-party” line during his tenure as defense minister. That some alteration in Zhukovʼs official status may be impending was further suggested when a Soviet military protocol officer recently appeared to be angling for an invitation to Zhukov to the US Armed Forcesʼ Day celebration on 21 May. Zhukov has not been invited in recent years, but the omission of his name has never previously evoked Soviet comment.

Any degree of restoration of respectability for Zhukov would have a political motivation. His removal as defense minister and as a member of the party presidium in 1957 was clearly engineered by Khrushchev, who charged that he had sought to gain the independence of the military from party control. Thus, Zhukovʼs public re-emergence would be viewed as an indication of increased influence for the professional soldier as opposed to the party, political military leaders, and his return to even partial favor would reflect adversely on Khrushchev.

Other recent straws in the wind which suggest jockeying for position by Khrushchevʼs subordinates include an implied criticism in the press of presidium member Aleksey Kirilenko—long a Khrushchev associate—for his performance as Sverdlovsk Oblast party boss during 1955-1962, and a slight momentary downgrading of his name in the usually alphabetical press listing of the presidium.

Despite these various signs of stress, Khrushchev has continued to receive prominent attention in the press. Throughout the time he has been away from Moscow, he has been sent numerous adulatory greetings from various meetings throughout the country, and his statements have been liberally quoted. There have also been references to the party presidium “headed by Khrushchev.” Although no such position as “head” of the presidium formally exists, the formulation is not unusual and its use conveys to the party faithful that Khrushchev is indeed the leader.

That there is an opposition to Khrushchev seems undeniable nevertheless, and it may be asserting itself sufficiently to make the situation intolerable from his standpoint. His past behavior would indicate that he will not stand idly by while his opponents gather strength. He will probably return to Moscow within the next few days, and may at that time attempt a decisive display of his authority perhaps in the form of a new policy statement, further top-level personnel changes, or both. It is possible, however, that the balance of forces within the leadership is now so fine that he will find it politically inexpedient to force a showdown at this time and may therefore have no other choice than to temporize.



* * *



* Source: Central Intellience Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Confidential. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 6-7 of the issue.





318. Editorial Note


In a meeting with his advisers on April 19, 1963, the President “indicated his belief that Soviet activities in Cuba should be considered as an element of the problem in Laos,” according to an undated memorandum prepared by one of the participants, William Colby. “He [Kennedy] recognized that action against the Soviets in Cuba would not affect Laos directly but he did feel that the Soviets were continuing the type of harassment effort in Laos that we had stopped by the Cuban exiles and that the Soviets were not moving out of Cuba as we wished. He believed that there were perhaps direct steps we could take in Cuba, such as resumption of low-level reconnaissance, which would place pressure on the Soviets at a place where they were somewhat weaker as a concomitant action to pressures we might impose in the area of Laos.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XXIV, pages 974-975.

In a National Security Council meeting the following day, the President again linked Laos and Cuba. According to the summary record of the meeting, Kennedy “commented that with the [U.S.] prisoners out of Cuba, we might be in a position to act against Cuba if Khrushchev made no move to halt the deterioration in Laos. He asked what action we could take against Cuba. Director McCone said we should fly low-level reconnaissance missions which were necessary no matter what happens in Laos.” Ambassador Thompson “pointed out that a U.S. bombing raid on Pathet Lao forces in Laos would be easier for Khrushchev to accept than U.S. action against Cuba.” For text, see ibid., pages 976-980.





319. Editorial Note


In telegram 2274 to Moscow, April 23, 1963, the Department of State instructed Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Harriman to proceed to Moscow to discuss the situation in Laos with Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko and Chairman Khrushchev. “You should recall to the Chairman the mutual commitments exchanged in Vienna and express the Presidentʼs firm belief that unless these commitments and the subsequent Accords reached at Geneva can be effectively implemented, it is difficult for the President to see how any other agreement can be successfully reached and carried out.” For text of telegram 2274 and the memorandum of Harrimanʼs conversation with Khrushchev and Gromyko on April 26, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XXIV, pages 997-998 and 1000-1005.





320. Editorial Note


In his letter to President Kennedy, April 29, 1963, (see Document 316) Chairman Khrushchev devoted several paragraphs to Cuba. Regarding the Soviet military presence, he reiterated that the Soviets had “withdrawn several times more people than has been stated in the American press. How this matter will develop in the future depends on a number of circumstances and in the first place on the pace at which the atmosphere in the region of the Caribbean Sea will be normalized, and whether, as could be expected, the reasons which occasioned the necessity for assistance to the Cubans by Soviet military specialists and instructors will disappear.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XI, pages 791-793.

The next day, at a meeting of the National Security Council, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Harriman reported on his talks on Cuba with Khrushchev and Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko in Moscow on April 25. According to the summary record of the meeting, “Harriman believes the Russians will go to great lengths to ensure that Castro remains in control of Cuba. After Cuban troops are trained, the Russian troops can be expected to leave, but Soviet economic aid will be continued at a level necessary to ensure a going economy in Cuba.” For text, see ibid., pages 795-797. The memorandum of Harrimanʼs conversation with Khrushchev and Gromyko on April 25 is ibid., pages 788-791.





321. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet UnionSource


Washington, May 9, 1963, 2:30 p.m.

2429. Embtels 2828 and 2829.1 Department fully agrees it most desirable attempt effect reduction present high degree militia interference with access visitors to Embassy. Consider proposed note excellent and concur in deliveryMFA within next few days.

However, Department does not wish note receive any publicity at this time. Soviets would undoubtedly regard such move as defensive retaliation for unfavorable publicity Embassy receiving from Penkovsky trial. Also believe Soviets more likely take note seriously if it not followed by publication.

Department shares Embassy belief note will at best produce only temporary improvement situation and assumes Embassy will follow closely developments subsequent to delivery of note. Should circumstances warrant, Embassy might consider follow-up note bringing chronology up to date at which time consideration could be given to publication both notes.

Re proposal for retaliatory procedures outlined in numbered para two Embtel 2828, believe such action would be both impractical and unwise. While such retaliation might conceivably serve to intensify pressure on Soviets to modify their practices, it would inevitably create counter public relations pressures here which would probably lead to net Soviet advantage. Also very doubtful we would be able to establish and maintain close controls and coordination essential to effective execution of program even for short time.

Concur in your holding discussions of situation with NATO colleagues. However, at moment we would not favor raising problem in NATO although we would not exclude possibility such action in future.

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 17 US-USSR. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Guthrie and Owen, cleared by Thompson, and approved by Davis.

1 Both dated May 8. Telegram 2828 reported that interference by Soviet militia guards at the entrances to the Embassy had produced a situation where individuals not known by sight as employees could not enter the premises without identifying themselves. The Embassy proposed sending a protest note, which would be released within 48 hours, and asking the District of Columbia police to interfere with persons entering the Soviet Embassy in Washington. (Ibid.) Telegram 2829 transmitted the text of the protest note. (Ibid.)





322. Memorandum of Conversation Between the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) and the Soviet Ambassador (Dobrynin)Source


Washington, May 17, 1963.

The Ambassador and I had a very cheerful lunch, as part of a series of meetings which he is conducting before his return to Moscow on consultation. We began by agreeing that it was a good thing that the date for Secretary Ruskʼs visit to the Soviet Union had been set,1 and I congratulated the Ambassador on the opportunity which this would provide him for being out of Washington in the worst week of the year. He expressed his own satisfaction at plans for the Secretaryʼs visit and went on to say that he had had a personal view that three members of this government should visit Moscow at appropriate times—Secretary Rusk, Robert Kennedy, and myself. He felt that these three visits would create a proper preparation for a visit by the President early in his second term. (At another point in the conversation the Ambassador expressed his own personal conviction that the President was certain of reelection, and at still another point he said that it appeared to him that there was no Republican who was even remotely in a position to challenge the President.)

The Ambassador asked me how I thought things stood between our two countries and where progress could be made. I said that I was sure he had heard from others that the most important single opportunity for progress now was in the withdrawal of Soviet forces from Cuba. I said that I knew of the conversation between the Chairman and Governor Harriman on this point,2 and that it remained very difficult to see how we could make progress on other issues while this one remained between us. I said that we had not pressed this point hard in public because we thought that it was probably better, if possible, not to appear to apply open international pressure. The Ambassador said that this was entirely correct and gave me quite a long “personal” discourse on the way in which his “proud young country” would react to excited speeches from Senator-this or Congressman-that. I assured him that neither here nor elsewhere was the President interested in scoring public victories. What counted for us was action.

On other subjects the Ambassador and I agreed that there did not seem to be much prospect of any early movement between our two countries. I remarked that his Government seemed to be preoccupied with other matters, and he did not dissent. He expressed his regret that there seemed to be no progress on the test ban, and repeated something of the same history which he had earlier discussed with Dr. Wiesner. I told him that we quite understood that there might well have been a misunderstanding between Dean and Kuznetsov, but I said also that we were much disappointed by the remarks in the Chairmanʼs most recent message about the shape and character of inspections.3 I said that we continued to believe that it was important to know something about the character of the inspection before settling definitely on a number; I said that the question whether one wanted three or seven loaves of bread necessarily depended somewhat on the size and shape of the loaf. While Ambassador Dobrynin was obviously aware of the Chairmanʼs use of the word “symbolic” to describe the inspections the Soviet Government had in mind, he insisted that if in fact we had agreed on three inspections in December, we would have found that the Soviet Government had fully prepared position papers which would have in fact made the three inspections real and useful. He of course repeated the standard Soviet view that no inspections are needed.

In response to a further question as to where I thought progress might now be made, I said that I would make an entirely personal suggestion, which was that the nuclear posture of Communist China must be a matter of real common interest to us. I said that I recognized the sensitivity of this topic, in the light of the relations between the Soviet Union and Communist China, which was called a member of the Socialist camp, but I said that I knew the President believed that this problem was one on which it would be useful to have a quite private and serious exchange of views. Ambassador Dobryninʼs reply was to say that our new plans for nuclear forces in NATO did not make it easier for the Soviet Government to deal with the question of Chinese nuclear ambition. He pressed his arguments against the multilateral force rather more strongly than I would have anticipated, and indicated that while he and more sophisticated observers could understand—without necessarily accepting—our argument that this was a way of preventing a still worse result, Russian opinion as a whole would not be so understanding. I emphasized as strongly as possible the arguments for binding the Germans safely in this fashion, instead of leaving them a prey to dangerous Gaullist fancies or other adventurous notions. (I nevertheless drew the inference from Dobryninʼs tone that while theMLF is being organized, and until it becomes a fait accompli, it may be hard to make any nuclear arrangements with the Soviet Government. Once it is in place, like NATO itself, it may be accepted as a fact of life from which to proceed.)

The Ambassador and I had a brief exchange about Laos in which the only novelty was that he did seem clearly to understand and to agree when I said that the maintenance of the position of Souvanna Phouma was essential to the agreement between the President and the Chairman. I pointed out that the danger to Souvanna now came from his side of the line, and while he gave certain standard answers about the accusations made by each side against the other, I think he took the point.

At a number of points in the conversation, the Ambassador and I talked about the importance of private and reliable communication. He repeated what he had said to Dr. Wiesner about the Chairmanʼs disappointment when reports of his December offer dribbled out in incomplete and inaccurate form very quickly on our side, and Dobrynin indicated that while he himself understood how such things could happen in our Government, it was quite another matter to explain them to the Chairman. I agreed that there was a problem here and indicated our own interest in maintaining privacy. I said that, in my judgment, if the Soviet Government were interested in further efforts on the nuclear testing problem it would be very important to arrange for intense discussion in some entirely private and unnoticed way. The Ambassador said that the Soviet Government could accept any means of communication that would serve this purpose, since its own ability to keep secrets was not in question. I accepted this point, remarking simply that this was one of the reasons why we were forced to take a different view of the problem on inspection. I repeated that I knew the President was still deeply interested in a test ban and would be glad to see this matter examined intensively on a very quiet basis, although, as I again repeated, we were disappointed by the Chairmanʼs last letter.

MG. B.



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR, Dobrynin Talks. Secret.

1 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. VI, pp. 286-287 and 289.

2 A memorandum of Harrimanʼs conversation with Khrushchev on April 25 is ibid., vol. XI, pp. 788-791.

3 See ibid., vol. VI, pp. 279-286.





323. Memorandum of Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and the Soviet Ambassador (Dobrynin)Source


Washington, May 18, 1963, 3:30 p.m.

During a two hour visit with Ambassador Dobrynin on board the Patrick J the following points emerged. They are not recorded in exact sequence but topically, since the conversation ranged back and forth.

Reappraisal in Moscow

I started by asking Dobrynin what he thought the principal questions are which would be asked of him when he reaches Moscow. He said that the overriding question was whether it is possible to reach any agreement with the United States on any subject. He said there was a dispute on this point going on among the leadership in Moscow and that they were indeed in the middle of a reappraisal. He said he thought it was of great importance that some point be found on which agreement could be reached. He emphasized the psychology of an agreement on something rather than the importance of the subject of agreement itself. For example, although he said he was not speaking on instructions and that the matter was one in which Khrushchev had no interest, he personally thought that even a Civil Air Transport Agreement would be advantageous. The remainder of our conversation was taken up with further exploration of points on which some agreement might be possible.

[Here follow 8 paragraphs on nuclear testing and the non-transfer of nuclear weapons; for text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 702-705.]

Berlin

There were only glancing references to Berlin. I did mention the possibility of some United Nations presence in Berlin with Soviet token forces in East Berlin and our present token forces in West Berlin. He listened attentively, did not reject the idea, but it was quite clear that no significance ought to be attached to his failure to reject my comment out of hand. I added that I thought an earlier remark of mine to Mr. Gromyko two years ago had proved to be well founded, namely, that more time could serve to reduce tensions in Central Europe and that frictions surrounding the Berlin question could become more manageable. I pointed to the easing of pressures on East Germany after the Wall and to such developments as the improvement of relations between West Germany and Eastern European countries.

NATO-Warsaw Pact Non-aggression Treaty

Dobrynin emphasized very strongly the psychological importance of a NATO-Warsaw Pact Non-aggression Agreement. He said that it did not mean very much in practice but that it could do no harm and that it would be important for those in the Soviet Union who were supporting the view that some sort of agreement with the West is possible. I told him that the Soviet proposal on this subject presented at Geneva1 had been discussed inNATO and that the general reaction had not been entirely negative. Dobrynin said they understood that there might be some problems about the form of such an agreement because of problems of recognition but that this was something which the Soviets were prepared to discuss. When I asked whether, for example, an exchange of letters between the Secretaries General of the two organizations would present any problem of form for them, he said this was entirely discussable and left the impression that this would be no particular obstacle. I told him that there was considerable skepticism about a pact which might seem to be as empty as the Kellogg-Briand Pact2 proved to be and that there were some in the West who felt that if we entered into such an agreement and this were followed by a severe Berlin crisis that we should all look like fools. He said, and I thought with some significance, that such a pact would make such a crisis far less likely. I repeat that Dobrynin pressed this point of a NATO-Warsaw Pact Non-aggression arrangement as though it were now number one priority for those in the Soviet Union who were trying to show that some agreement with the West is possible and that its psychological importance far outweighed its practical insignificance.3

Discussions Within Western Alliance

At one point Dobrynin asked me what was the significance of the discussions of differences among NATO members. I smiled and said whatever the meaning that it had nothing to do with the attitude of the Alliance toward the Soviet Union and that Moscow would make a great mistake if they should misunderstand this. Dobrynin not only admitted that this was so but said that Moscowʼs appraisal was so much in the same direction that they were frankly puzzled about the underlying meaning of the differences being expressed in the West. I commented briefly to the effect that it had much to do with the future internal organization of Europe and some special views of President DeGaulle as to the relative position of France in Western affairs. I added that I thought that it was of great importance to all of us, including the Soviet Union, that Germany be fully integrated into the main body of Western Europe and that this was a development in the general interest of peace.

Our 1964 Election and Cuba

Dobrynin said that he would be closely questioned about how he saw the forthcoming Presidential campaign in the United States and the basis upon which President Kennedy would conduct the campaign on matters affecting the Soviet Union. I told Dobrynin that I could not, of course, speak for the President on a matter which is still more than a year in the future but that I thought that the President would continue to be himself and follow his own deep convictions. In general, I felt that this meant he would recognize fully the solemn obligations which he and Chairman Khrushchev had toward the preservation of peace, that he would continue to strive to maintain close contacts with the Soviet Government in an effort to resolve outstanding issues, and that he would continue his search for particular points at which agreement might be possible. I said the great exception to this general approach was still Cuba, that Soviet military presence in Cuba was not acceptable to the American Government or the American people and that this was a matter of highest sensitivity which deeply impairs an attempt to develop normal and improving relations between our two countries. I said it was not in our mind to invade Cuba last year, that if we had wished to do so with American forces we would have done so in the spring of 1961, and that the Soviet military intrusion into Cuba and the missile episode produced a shock to our relations which will take time and much effort to repair. Dobrynin noted that I said “it was not” our intention to invade Cuba and asked about the present. I said the President had made it clear to Mr. Khrushchev that we do not now intend or desire to invade Cuba, that this derived from our own interests and attitudes in our long-term relations with our Latin American neighbors and that fear of any such action could not justify the continued presence of Soviet military personnel in Cuba. I said that, indeed, there were only two questions of fundamental difficulty between us and Cuba, the one being a military and political affiliation with Moscow and the other being Cubaʼs persistent effort to interfere with the affairs of other Latin American countries. The social system of Cuba or the treatment of American property were not questions which themselves could prevent a peaceful relation between Cuba and the rest of the hemisphere.

Dobrynin then said that there had been very substantial withdrawals of Soviet military personnel from Cuba and that those remaining were on training and technical assistance missions. I asked specifically about the four Soviet battalion combat groups and he said that he was not speaking on instructions but that it was his information that these units had “almost entirely” gone home. He said there had been an argument in the Kremlin about whether to furnish us exact information about the Soviet military personnel but that some had “gotten angry” and they had decided not to do so. I told him he might wish to consider whether there is anything further on this point that he could say to us, even privately, although we would not be able to tie our hands about commenting on our estimate of the situation derived from other sources.

Laos

We had a brief discussion about Laos in which I referred to Mr. Khrushchevʼs comment to Mr. Harriman that he, Khrushchev, had some problems because he had undertaken commitments on behalf of a third party. I told Dobrynin that we were aware of the possibility that Mr. Khrushchev might have some difficulty in exercising a decisive influence on the Pathet Lao on the ground in Laos. I noted that they might now be experiencing some of the difficulties which we ourselves had had with General Phoumi4 prior to the Geneva Accords. But I said that it was important to maintain the element of good faith with respect to the understandings reached between Chairman Khrushchev and President Kennedy on Laos; otherwise, we would strengthen the hands of those in the West who say that any agreement with the Soviet Union is simply impossible. I suggested that if Mr. Khrushchev is having difficulty in Laos that this might be something we ought to discuss frankly with each other in order to see whether there is anything which we together can do to give full effect to the agreement we had reached with respect to that country. I said I frankly did not understand the attitude of the Polish member of the ICC because I would suppose that Mr. Khrushchev could at least insure the full cooperation of the Polish representative in supporting fully the Geneva Accords. Dobrynin underlined the importance of the agreement between Khrushchev and Kennedy and said that it was important to the Soviet Union because the Soviet peoples are fully aware of the nature of the agreement, the personal commitment of Mr. Khrushchev himself and that they expected the agreement to be carried out. He made no specific comment about the Pole.

Interspersed with the above were occasional comments by Dobrynin about the difficulties “they” have in Moscow in understanding how things can happen in our society without the specific approval and support of President Kennedy. He referred to such things as speeches by leading Senators, leaks of the most confidential exchanges between the two governments, and the general problem of the constitutional limitations upon an American President. Dobrynin mentioned these as a part of his problem in explaining the United States to his own people because he himself and, he added, Mr. Gromyko have a better understanding of how our system works. He underlined, however, the importance of preventing leaks and noted, for example, that the famous Saturday Evening Post article contained specific phrases taken from a most confidential communication of the Chairman himself. I told him that the President was most anxious to preserve the confidential character of exchanges between himself and Mr. Khrushchev, and that we have taken the most strenuous measures from time to time to insure against leaks or to discover how an occasional leak in fact came about.

Dean Rusk5

POSTSCRIPT TO MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION

Latin American Nuclear Free Zone

Dobrynin raised at his initiative our attitude toward a Latin American nuclear free zone and seemed quite interested when I told him that we had encouraged the Brazilian initiative last year.6 I reminded him that we would not include U.S. territory such as Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands. He asked about Guantanamo and I told him that we were prepared to include Guantanamo in any such arrangements and subject Guantanamo to the same inspection procedures that would be used for the rest of Latin America, including Cuba. It is my impression that this is a subject in which the Soviets are interested.

Who is a Great Power?

Dobrynin told me that one of the problems which regularly irritates our relations is the people in Moscow think that United States methods in dealing with particular issues leave the impression that we do not take into sufficient account the Soviet Unionʼs prestige as a great power. I told him that Moscow should recognize that we ourselves know that the Soviet Union is a great power and that the Russian people are a brave people; the heroism at Leningrad, for example, is almost as legendary with us as it is with the Russian people themselves. But I added that it was important for the Soviet Union to bear in mind that the United States, too, is a great power and that the American people are a brave people. This calls for a regular sense of reciprocity in our approach to outstanding issues. He said he felt that the general proposition was understood on both sides but that in details (and he made a general allusion to Cuba) he thought we sometimes overlooked questions of their prestige.

Dean Rusk7





* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL US-USSR. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Rusk.

1 See Document 296.

2 For text of the Kellogg-Briand Treaty on the Renunciation of War, August 27, 1928, see Foreign Relations, 1928, vol. I, pp. 153 ff.

3 On May 17 Dobrynin had discussed this question with Ambassador Thompson along similar lines. A memorandum of their conversation is in Department of State, Central Files, POL 17 USSR-US.

4 General Phoumi Nosavan, Deputy Prime Minister of Laos.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

6 For text of Brazilian proposal for a Latin American denuclearized zone, introduced as a draft resolution to the First Committee of the U.N. General Assembly on November 15, 1962, see Documents on Disarmament, 1962, vol. II, pp. 1056-1057.

7 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.





324. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in FranceSource


Washington, May 21, 1963, 8:23 p.m.

5505. For the Ambassador. For your background, following is analysis Soviet and Soviet-ChiCom developments which you requested:1 1. Soviet developments. Soviets facing whole series serious internal and external problems and painful dilemmas. Internally, they seem to be devoting considerable attention to military posture. Disappearance of “missile gap” seems to have led Soviets to realize their military posture not sufficient to permit them to pursue policies they sought. Insofar as Cuban affair was attempt to redress situation relatively cheaply, there is evidence its failure may have led to even more painful decision, that of increasing resources devoted to military (note Khrushchev February electoral speech stressing guns over butter). Soviets may hope not so much actually overtake US militarily, but for some sort spectacular development creating impression of great strength, along lines Sputnik image in late fifties.

Virtually any increase in allocation to military would complicate already difficult resources problem. Agriculture in particular requires attention, and it seems unlikely administrative reorganization will successfully take place of greater funds for tractors, fertilizer, etc.

Soviet efforts at accelerating economic integration of Eastern Europe are encountering resistance (notably from Rumania) having nationalistic overtones. This problem is closely connected with both internal resources problem and relations with Chinese.

Soviets have suffered number of setbacks in policy towards nonaligned. Once promising relations with Guinea and Nasser have cooled, Soviets have been effectively blocked in Congo, Soviets are now competing with ChiComs as well as West in under-developed areas, and coup in Iraq constituted dramatic reverse. Soviets are apparently attempting to salvage something in Iraq by support of Kurds.

Internally, problem with intellectuals also appears to have become serious. Attempt to allow somewhat greater intellectual freedom without either allowing it to get out of hand, or controlling it by old proven Stalinist methods is not simple task. Most significant aspect this struggle would seem be almost unprecedented resistance offered by some intellectual circles.

As to rumors of difficulties within Soviet leadership, and possible challenge to Khrushchev, we have no hard evidence Khrushchev is in fact in trouble. Soviet difficulties must have created disagreements and policy disputes within leadership, and may have affected Khrushchevʼs position to some extent. There is probably some sense of general frustration. Khrushchevʼs political skill, however, should enable him to survive. We will be interested in seeing if apparent need to replace Kozlov adds to existing strains.



2. Sino-Soviet dispute. Dispute is probably most serious problem facing Bloc. Although both Chinese and Soviets have finally, after considerable parrying, agreed on July 5 date for bilateral meeting between CPSU and CPC, unlikely such meeting could result in reconciliation. Both sides persist in defending own positions, attacking those of other side, show no signs of willingness compromise on substance, and are actively attempting line up support among CPʼs. (See, for example, Hong Kongʼs 1926 to Dept, rptd Paris, for recent Liu speech.)2 Soviets are concerned over considerable progress ChiComs have made in lining up Far East parties, and in attracting groups sympathetic to them within number of WE and LA parties directly challenging Soviet leadership.

In general sense, dispute is obviously in interest [of the] West, though we see little we can, or in fact need, do to further it at this stage. At same time, it does not solve our problems—Soviet military strength, for example, is unaffected—and it brings with it some dangers, which already apparent. While Chinese will be able rely less on Sino-Soviet alliance, and may hence be cautious vis-à-vis major Western powers, they may also regard some of their neighbors as opportune targets for the more active strategy they advocate. Laos would seem example. Moreover, Soviet influence over Chinese and their sympathizers has significantly decreased, and Soviets now appear unwilling take actions which might focus attention on this decreased influence. Therefore, while Soviets would probably prefer see continued adherence to Geneva accords in Laos, they are letting present situation develop, in hope risks for them are low. In any event, extent of their influence at present is debatable.

East-West relations. We see little prospect in immediate future for progress with Soviets in East-West matters. Soviets are dragging their feet in virtually all negotiations with West (test ban, Berlin, disarmament, UN Outer Space matters, etc.). Factors may include Soviet recognition they are now in position of weakness, and desire postpone decisions involving West until their position strengthened. May also include Soviet concern lest agreements possible with West now would make them more vulnerable to ChiCom criticism and adversely affect Soviet struggle for influence over other Communist parties. We would not describe present Soviet posture as hard line, but rather immobility and absence of soft line. We do not, therefore, expect aggressive Soviet actions which would risk major confrontation with West, though there may well be more aggressive Soviet efforts exploit situations that arise, (such as Kurds) when they consider risk of doing so, in terms of confrontation with West, to be low. Since present Soviet posture seems to be one of holding action, rather than movement towards harder or softer line, we would expect them to try keep channels of communication open to us. We consider it in our interest to keep channels open, both to prevent Soviets from feeling compelled for lack of alternatives to drift into harder line, and to facilitate further progress at such time as Soviets decide this possible.





Ball



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL USSR. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Valdes on May 17; cleared by Thompson, Ball, Harriman, Tyler, Guthrie (in draft), FE, and EUR; and approved by Davis.

1 The request has not been identified further. A similar analysis had been transmitted in Topol 1689 to Paris, May 10, for use at a meeting of the NATO political advisors. (Ibid., NATO 3-1)

2 Dated May 14, it summarized Liu Shao-Chiʼs speech at Hanoi, May 12. (Ibid., POL 7 CHICOM)





325. Editorial Note


On May 18, 1963, the Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, Glenn T. Seaborg, flew to Moscow for the signing of a new Memorandum on Cooperation between the United States and the Soviet Union in the Field of the Utilization of Atomic Energy for Peaceful Purposes that would replace the one signed in 1959. The 12-day visit to the Soviet Union, which Seaborg described as “memorable,” included the signing of the Memorandum on May 21, visits to laboratories and scientific institutes, and conversation with Presidium Chairman Brezhnev and Education Minister Vyacheslav P. Yelyutin on May 29. Memoranda of these two conversations were transmitted in airgrams A-1743, May 31, and A-1764, June 4, from Moscow. (Department of State, Central Files, POL US-USSR and SCI US-USSR) For Seaborgʼs account of the trip, including records of his meetings with Ambassador Dobrynin and President Kennedy before it and with Brezhnev, see Seaborg, Kennedy, Khrushchev, and the Test Ban, pages 201-206. His journal for the period of the visit is in the Library of Congress, Seaborg Papers, Journal 1961-1971, volume 5. For text of the memorandum, see 15 UST 631.





326. National Intelligence EstimateSource


Washington, May 22, 1963.

NIE 11-63

MAIN TRENDS IN SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY

[Here follows the Conclusions section of the paper.]

Discussion

1. The Background of Present Soviet Policy

1. The position in which the Soviet leaders find themselves in 1963 is not the one which they anticipated five years ago. Soviet thinking in 1958 was pervaded by a general optimism arising from a number of factors and calculations. Khrushchev, who had recently obtained a commanding position, apparently judged that he had overcome both economic dislocations and the political turbulence unloosed by de-Stalinization and could look forward to steady and substantial internal progress. His view of relations among Communist States seems to have been that, freed of the burden of Stalinist excesses, Soviet policy could guide the Bloc more effectively with a looser hand while preserving the essentials of Moscowʼs leadership.

2. Looking out upon the non-Communist world, Khrushchev probably had considerable hopes that trends in the underdeveloped areas would continue to run in his favor and that theUSSRʼs earlier successes in the Middle East could be extended in that area and repeated in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. Most important of all, the USSRʼs early sputnik and ICBM successes evidently persuaded him that the image and perhaps even the substance of Soviet physical power would soon overbear that of the US and bring the West to the conference table ready for concessions to his demands. In short, Khrushchev in 1958 saw the “world relation of forces” shifting rapidly in favor of the USSR and believed that history, with vigorous assistance from Moscow, would in the coming period reward the Soviet cause with regular, tangible advances.

3. Almost none of this has come to pass. In the relations of military power, regarded by the Soviets as an indispensable element in their general calculation of forces, US military and intelligence programs have led to a situation in which both sides, and indeed much of world opinion, understand that strategic advantage does not lie with the USSR. The Berlin ultimatum of 1958 remains unfulfilled and, save for the constriction of East Germanyʼs refugee flow, basic Soviet aims in the key area of Germany are no further advanced. Although the Soviets may expect some benefits from present strains in NATO, over the last five years the strength of the West as a whole has almost certainly assumed a more formidable aspect in their eyes. In the underdeveloped countries, postcolonial nationalism has in most areas openly diverged from the hoped-for association with Soviet policies, and the USSR has not succeeded in establishing patronage, much less control, over the new nations.

4. Over the same period, the USSRʼs relations with its major ally have fallen into acute disarray, and the Soviets must now defend themselves throughout the Communist movement to preserve a leadership which had not been effectively challenged for four decades. At home, economic progress has faltered for a variety of reasons, of which the most important is the impact of military and space spending. At the same time, intellectual circles have used Khrushchevʼs attacks upon Stalin to raise painful questions which tend to challenge the authority of the party and its present leaders.

5. This is by no means to say that the last five years have brought an uninterrupted series of defeats for Soviet policy. During this period, for example, a procession of space feats has regularly revitalized Soviet prestige and sustained the USSRʼs lead in this important field of competition. Both nuclear and missile development have recorded notable technical progress. The Berlin Wall has greatly eased the problems of the client state of East Germany. Cubaʼs accession to the Communist camp remains a major gain despite the October backdown and the subsequent problems and dangers encountered in dealing with Castro and the US. Nevertheless, the Soviet leadership seems to recognize the last five years as a period in which problems accumulated.

6. There is no sign that this trend has caused the Soviets to revise their fundamental assumptions or that they regard these setbacks as more than temporary. There are many signs, however, of a recognition that earlier expectations were overoptimistic. Their unwillingness to turn over Berlin access to East Germany and their precipitate withdrawal of strategic missiles from Cuba are the most striking instances testifying to a sober appraisal of their opportunities under the present relation of forces between East and West. A similar concern can be observed in their treatment of the Sino-Soviet dispute, the importance of which they no longer attempt to deny, and of their military position, where assertions of absolute superiority have given way to claims of parity and expressions of anxiety about US intentions and the future relation of military forces. Similarly, the indiscriminate optimism of Soviet pronouncements concerning new countries and independence movements is now heavily tempered by criticism of the bourgeois and anti-Communist tendencies of nationalist leaders. Domestically, the regime has had to issue warnings to consumers that defense priorities will cut into the program to raise living standards, and Khrushchev does not seem confident that former rates of general economic growth can be quickly regained. In sum, the leadership appears to realize that the disappointments of recent years are not isolated but in fact represent a series of related setbacks stemming in part from mistaken appraisals of the possibilities open to Soviet policy.

7. In our view, the attempt to deploy strategic missiles in Cuba was in considerable part due to Soviet recognition of this trend. We think that the Soviet leaders, as they pondered this venture, were highly conscious of the failing momentum of their offensive and therefore put a very high premium on a dramatic triumph which they could turn to account in many ways—to alter both the image and the substance of relative power, to prepare a fruitful ground for Berlin negotiations, to undermine US influence in Latin America, to disarm Chinese criticisms. They may have judged the chances of failure as high but nevertheless felt it necessary to take a calculated risk, or the need for a victory may have led them to persuade themselves that the chances of failure were in fact low. In any case, we believe that the accumulated discouragements of recent years contributed to a decision which did not reflect the caution usually characteristic of Soviet foreign policy moves.



II. The Situation in the Leadership

8. The failure of the Cuban missile venture has aggravated all the problems which the Soviets meant it to resolve. There are various signs that it has also affected Soviet top-level politics. Analysis of the workings of the Soviet leadership must always involve considerable speculation, but our tentative conclusions suggest that, at the present time, Soviet foreign policy may be influenced in more than usual degree by internal disagreements.

9. Khrushchev occupies the central position in Soviet politics, and his personality and conceptions give a strong stamp to both the internal and foreign policies of the USSR. He is capable of revising ideology to suit his purposes, but he is a great deal more than merely pragmatic. Compared to his predecessor and apparently also to some of his present colleagues, he is an imaginative innovator in both doctrine and policy, prone to change course rapidly in his incessant search for results. Approaching each new tactic with his characteristic energy, he tends to outdo others in boldness and often to assume considerable risk, trusting to his political skill to retrieve a situation somehow if difficulties ensure, even by reversing himself completely if necessary. The prime move of this type which can be directly associated with Khrushchev is the daring stroke of de-Stalinization, but the same traits can be observed in such disparate moves as the New Lands campaign, the Berlin challenge of 1958, the 1960 military reorganization plan, the cultivation of a “spirit of Camp David,” and the two reconciliations with Tito. This pattern suggests to us that Khrushchev either initiated the Cuban missile venture himself or adopted it early and supported it against any doubters.

10. Because of these tendencies, any opposition to Khrushchev within the Soviet leadership has tended to be a conservative opposition, that is, one which both prefers greater caution in the appraisal of risks and shies away from novel departures in doctrine or policy. Khrushchev is accessible to the ideas of others, but it appears that most of his innovations originate either with himself, younger associates, or specialists rather than with his colleagues in the top leadership. While he is usually able to muster majorities for his proposals, some of them have at various times encountered opposition which has limited or even undone them. And when several of his programs encounter difficulties simultaneously, the restraints exerted by his colleagues accumulate. If the coalescence of opinion is strong, Khrushchev reacts by shifting ground to place himself at the head of the new and more conservative consensus which is forming. But he often returns to his original conceptions when he deems that a propitious moment has arrived.

11. The recent period appears to be one in which Khrushchev has been on the defensive and has had to move away from venturesome positions with which he had clearly identified himself in the past. In February, he all but abandoned his longstanding proposals for a substantial increase in allocations to agriculture and light industry; these had been continually opposed by the military and probably by some political leaders as well. In March, Khrushchevʼs chastisement of rebellious writers and artists abruptly checked the de-Stalinization campaign which he had himself revived last fall. Khrushchev in the past has used de-Stalinization as a means of direct attack upon political opponents, and it is possible that this latest reversal represents a successful defense by his intended targets. At a minimum, Khrushchevʼs judgment has probably been discredited by the strong antiregime overtones which emerged when the intellectuals responded to his earlier encouragement to renewed attacks on Stalin.

12. These moves are logical responses to real problems, but they also comport better with the predilections of some of Khrushchevʼs colleagues than with his own earlier views and this, along with several ambiguous indications of current uncertainty in Moscow, suggests that his predominance has diminished somewhat. The difficulties with China, the frustrations over Berlin, and the humiliation in Cuba have probably worked in the same direction. We think it unlikely that any faction is actively seeking Khrushchevʼs downfall. Instead, such leaders as Kozlov and Suslov have probably wished to bring about a greater practice of collectivity in Soviet policymaking and, by this route, to tighten central controls, insist upon ideological conformity, and eschew radical and risky departures in domestic and foreign affairs. Khrushchevʼs temperament is not amenable to collectivity, however, and he is likely to respond to checks of this kind by moving to reassert his dominance. Kozlovʼs illness is in this respect convenient; whether real or political, it undermines his present strength and may lead to further personnel shifts which Khrushchev could turn to his own advantage.



III. The Soviet View of Present Opportunities

13. We believe that a phase in regime politics of the sort described above has contributed to the relative immobility which seems to characterize current Soviet foreign policy. Even without this factor, however, there are important reasons for the Soviets to avoid major new moves. From the leadershipʼs viewpoint, no major change in Soviet policy, such as a serious attempt to reduce cold-war tensions drastically or a vigorous new offensive against non-Communist positions, seems to offer much promise at present.

14. The Soviets would not expect that they could improve their position through negotiated agreements at a time when they are relatively weak and their enemy feels relatively strong. In such periods, the task of Soviet diplomacy is primarily to pursue defensive tactics until a more favorable correlation of forces can be brought about. Khrushchevʼs post-October advocacy of negotiation and compromise was intended primarily to buttress his version of the missile withdrawal as a victory for peace rather than a defeat for the Soviet Union and to forestall possible US efforts to follow up with pressures on other Soviet positions. The Soviets did offer one concession which seemed important, probably also to them, when Khrushchev accepted the principle of on-site inspection of a test ban. But the USSR soon indicated, by its conduct of the negotiations which followed and its refusal to go beyond three inspections, that it required greater counterconcessions than were forthcoming from the US before it would actually sign a treaty. The requirement to sustain some commitment to Cuba in the face of continued US hostility to Castro raised a further barrier against any general relaxation of tensions, as did the need for an external threat to justify continuing deprivations at home.

15. In fact, while statements praising the method of mutual concessions have not dropped out of Soviet propaganda altogether, they are now overshadowed by charges that the West remains hostile and has no genuine interest in reaching settlements. This does not mean, however, that aggressive Soviet actions are to follow. In the first place, the USSR recognizes that the world situation currently presents no opportunities for major advances at tolerable levels of risk: indeed, in 1963 it has suffered distinct reverses in the Middle East and is having difficulty in holding its own in some areas of Africa. In the second place, the Cuban episode has demonstrated to the Soviets that forward action is not without peril. Current Soviet pronouncements betray a keen appreciation of US power, and the October crisis has almost certainly persuaded them that they had underrated US determination to use that power.

16. In these circumstances, the Soviets seem to see the present period as one which can best be used to build up their strength and to fortify existing positions in preparation for future opportunities to make new advances. They seek in the first instance to strengthen their military power in hopes of gaining a position which repairs their prestige and lays greater inhibitions on Western policy.1 Recent strong reaffirmations of military priorities reflect a determination to proceed with existing programs and, beyond this, a possible decision to increase military spending above previously planned levels. These programs already include the introduction of protected strategic missile systems, the development of very-high-yield warheads, and a major antiballistic missile effort which has already led to the deployment of a first-generation system at one location. The USSR is also pursuing a vigorous research and development effort aimed at technological advances which could radically enhance both the war-fighting capability and the political value of its military establishment. As an important aspect of these efforts, the Soviets are conducting a space program aimed at prestigious accomplishments and are almost certainly investigating the feasibility of military space systems.

17. We do not mean, however, that the Soviets consider that, unless they can achieve some sort of military advantage over the West, their political advances have reached final limits. Military power remains only one ingredient, albeit a very important one, in the Soviet concept of the forces which determine their prospects. Still less do we believe that Soviet foreign policy in the present phase will be passive. The USSR will be alert to search out vulnerabilities in the non-Communist world, to exploit the differences which have arisen in the NATO alliance, and to make its influence felt throughout Asia, Latin America, and Africa. But the Soviet leadersʼ outlook is not one of high confidence that events can readily be made to move in their favor, and we think it likely that they will take a sober view in the present period of the opportunities for major advance.

18. There is one important caveat to this judgment. We have identified the need for a major triumph which would reverse a trend of adversity as an important part of the Soviet motivation for deploying missiles to Cuba. This need still remains; in fact, it has been magnified by the Cuban failure itself and by subsequent problems, such as the Communist setback in Iraq, the Western gain in India, and the renewed Chinese onslaught on Soviet leadership of the Communist movement. While we think it probable that the Cuban venture has strengthened the counsels of caution in Moscow, we cannot exclude the possibility of some new and audacious move. Such actions are essentially incalculable, although we think they are somewhat more likely when Khrushchevʼs ascendancy is high than when collectivity, that is, his need to defer to the opinions of others, has been strengthened. Nor can we predict where such a move might be launched. We note, however, that Berlin would offer a field for a far-reaching Soviet victory, although it is obviously an extremely risky area in which to pose a major challenge.

19. It is also conceivable that Khrushchev will react to present frustrations in the opposite way, that is, by focusing upon a major agreement with the West, rather than a major encroachment against it, as the means of restoring movement to Soviet policy and scoring a personal triumph. Given the present status of such issues as a nuclear test ban and Berlin, it is difficult to see how he could expect to achieve an early settlement without making visible concessions or reductions in earlier Soviet demands. If he nevertheless chose to pursue this course, and to represent the results as important advances for the USSR, he would thereby set up a powerful momentum for general detente and bring new confusion into official ideology. This in turn would intensify the strains in the international Communist movement and magnify present doubts within the Soviet Party about his leadership. For these reasons, and because of Khrushchevʼs own ambitions to achieve the kind of victories abroad which are clear defeats for the West, we think it very unlikely that he will proceed in this direction, although we cannot entirely exclude this possibility.



IV. Soviet Tactics in the Near Term

20. Berlin and Germany. We believe that the USSR does not intend in the near future to pose a sharp and direct challenge to the Western position in Berlin. Khrushchevʼs remarks in East Berlin last January2 seemed designed to put Ulbricht on notice that his regime, protected by the Wall, must now concentrate upon a policy of internal stabilization and growth and not expect early progress toward the objective of ejecting the Allies. Similarly, the manner in which the USSR has resumed Berlin conversations with the US suggests that it does not intend an early showdown. We think it unlikely, however, that the Soviets expect these talks to lead to any early agreement on Berlin. Instead, we believe that their motives are, first, to avoid the impression of weakness which would be conveyed by allowing the issue to die entirely and, second, to get into a position to sow distrust and suspicion among the Allies and West Germany. In pursuing these ends, they are likely to resort to sporadic local harassments.

21. It is possible, however, that the Soviets will in fact seek some sort of mutually acceptable Berlin agreement as a way of discharging Khrushchevʼs longstanding commitment on this matter and collecting such concessions as can be extracted in return for an easing of pressures on the Allied position in the city. In such an effort, they would presumably have to accept a continued Allied presence in West Berlin and some form of guaranteed access. The USSR for its part would be primarily interested in extracting as much recognition as possible for the GDR, perhaps by involving it in the administration of Allied ground and air access in a way which did not entirely extinguish formal Soviet responsibility. Once such an agreement was achieved, the Soviets would probably feel free to fulfill their long-adjourned promise to conclude a peace treaty with the GDR. The USSR would of course wish to set a predetermined duration on a Berlin agreement and, if this proved impossible, to obtain a formula sufficiently vague on this point to allow them to renew pressures at some future time.

22. Recent developments in the Western Alliance affecting the control of nuclear weapons and the present check to the European unity movement seem to have focused Soviet attention once again on Europe. The prospects for changes of political leadership in West Germany and Britain probably reinforce this tendency. We do not foresee any particular Soviet initiative aimed at European problems, but the possibility of promoting disarray in the Western camp may be more strongly present as a factor affecting Soviet policy than it has been for some time past. Both the Franco-German treaty3 and the plans to admit West Germany to a larger role in NATOʼs nuclear policy have already provoked a sharp verbal Soviet response. The vague threat to take countermeasures against West German participation in a multilateral force probably has no more substance than the long series of threats which have accompanied the whole process of German rearmament. It is possible, however, that the Soviets will respond by increasing their efforts to extract from the West some formal recognition of the existence of two Germanies, reasoning that this would offset the dangers of a nuclear-armed Federal Republic by making it more difficult for Bonn to mount heavy pressures against East Germany. There may also be a revival of Soviet interest in limited arms control measures affecting Germany.

23. Disarmament. The Soviets probably still see certain advantages to themselves in more general measures of arms control and disarmament. They would doubtless count it an advance, for example, if they could find a means of preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons or reducing the chances of accidental war. The burden of modern armaments on the Soviet economy is an increasingly important argument for the stabilization of the arms race. On the other hand, the Soviets set great store by the political usefulness of great military power. Furthermore, they are aware that broad disarmament or arms control measures would have profound implications—intimate cooperation with the enemy and recognition of a higher sovereignty in an international control organ—running contrary to their assertions of inevitable hostility between the two world camps. As a result, they have regarded disarmament questions primarily as an opportunity to capture peace sentiments and to mobilize pressures against Western military measures.

24. Present Soviet behavior indicates that post-October reappraisals have not altered this approach, and that the USSR does not regard the present period as a favorable one for reaching arms control agreements which would advance Soviet interests. Such a conclusion seems to be reflected in the announcement of economic policies which recommit the Soviets to an intense military competition. Moreover, in the present context, it would be difficult to move on to further significant advances in the field of disarmament and arms control without first concluding a test ban agreement. The Soviets have evidently decided that the gap between Soviet and US positions on this matter, while narrowed, is still too wide to be bridged. In this, we believe that they are influenced by the desire not to encourage hopes for a detente which would be generated inside the USSR by a major East-West agreement. During the present phase, therefore, we believe that the Sovietsʼ approach to disarmament will be primarily agitational and will focus on those measures which offer one-sided rather than mutual advantages.

25. Cuba.4 The outlines of a post-October Soviet policy toward Cuba have now emerged. The USSRʼs immediate objective is to preserve the position it won in 1960-1962, in the face of pressures from the US and problems in dealing with Castro. To this end it is continuing a substantial flow of economic assistance which appears sufficient to maintain the Cuban economy at least at present levels. It regularly reiterates a commitment, albeit undefined, to the security of the regime. While the Soviets of course would prefer a disciplined puppet to take charge in Havana, they have accepted Castro, put up with his periodic public barbs at the USSR, and apparently agreed that the Moscow-oriented Communists should avoid conflict with him. Similarly, they are trying to reduce the chances of heightened US pressures by not firing upon overflights, by withdrawing some personnel, and probably also by urging Castro to soft-pedal the fomentation of armed revolution in Latin America. One purpose of these actions is to induce the US to move toward de facto acceptance of Castro.

26. The pattern of Soviet policy toward Cuba described above probably means that the primary Soviet aim at present is to consolidate communism in Cuba with a view to using it as a foothold from which to pursue the longer term struggle for Latin America which the Soviets foresee. If this is so, it is unlikely that the Soviets would prejudice this aim by again attempting to use Cuba as a strategic base, thus courting violent US action against the Castro regime. This is not to say that the Soviets will never again attempt the introduction of some sort of offensive weapons system into Cuba. The time might come when they would again calculate that the net of advantages and risks would favor such an attempt. For at least the near term, however, the Soviets almost certainly estimate that the risks of such an attempt would be excessive.

27. If this is their present judgment, the Soviets must reconsider the usefulness to them of those forces which went to Cuba as part of the missile deployment. There are some signs that they intend to make gradual further withdrawals, but we would expect a significant number of Soviet military personnel to remain in Cuba indefinitely, in training and advisory roles at least. We expect the Soviets to hand over to Castro their advanced weapons as the Cuban forces are trained to operate them, possibly including control over the surface-to-air missile (SAM) system. We are unable to estimate a date by which Cubans would acquire complete control of the SAM system, but we do not exclude that this could occur as early as the latter part of 1963. This would, in the Soviet view, involve some risk of Cuban attacks upon reconnaissance aircraft which could touch off a new major crisis, but they may regard this risk as preferable to the political cost of either withdrawing the system or trying to keep it indefinitely under their own command.

28. The Underdeveloped Areas.5 The USSRʼs understanding of the “national liberation” movement identifies the emergence of new, independent nations as an important gain for the Soviet world position. The Soviets go on, however, to argue the necessity of a second stage, that of “national democracy,” the hallmark of which is the participation of local Communists in a governing national front. This in turn creates the prerequisites for “completing” the revolution, with or without violence, by installing the Communist Party in power. Events of the last five years, however, have not followed this pattern. Cuba has reached approximately the predicted destination, but by an unpredicted route and in a manner which leaves the USSR with economic and military leverage but without full disciplinary control. The Indonesian Communist Party has successfully practiced the tactics of building political weight and respectability and shows some promise of leading its country into the phase of “national democracy.” But the Cuban experience, and the Indonesian Partyʼs behavior in the Sino-Soviet dispute, cannot give the Soviets much assurance that the Indonesian Party in power would follow Soviet guidance in a disciplinary way either. Elsewhere, nationalist leaders have generally rebuffed or even repressed the Communists; in some cases, Soviet state relations with the new governments have not escaped damage.

29. One of the features of the general line of policy described in this paper will probably be an increased emphasis, in areas where this is feasible, on efforts to build subversive capabilities and tangible political assets within the underdeveloped countries. The challenge of the Chinese Communists, and in Latin America the competing appeal of Fidelismo, reinforce the reasons for a greater Soviet effort in this direction. Nevertheless we do not expect any radical turn in Soviet policy stressing early Communist attempts to come to power. The Soviet leaders continue to give evidence that, in most cases, they regard such attempts as premature, more likely to set back rather than advance the fortunes of the local parties, and prejudicial to other Soviet interests. Meanwhile, they will continue to rely upon diplomacy and material assistance; even though stringencies in the domestic economy and their growing awareness of the limited political returns on aid programs may lead them to become more selective in assuming new economic commitments, they do not wish to abandon this field to the West.6

30. Communist China. At the present stage of the Sino-Soviet dispute, neither Moscow nor Peiping entertains much hope of pressuring or persuading the rival leadership to alter its stand. The stakes in the conflict are therefore the allegiance of other Communist parties and radical movements in the non-Communist world. Because China has made gradual but regular gains in this competition over the last two years, particularly in Asia, the Soviets have a strong interest in gaining some sort of respite, especially at a time when the accumulation of problems elsewhere has lowered their prestige. The clearest example of this interaction occurred last October when the Soviets, foreseeing the possibility of a retreat in the Cuban missile crisis, made a vain bid to forestall Chinese criticism by momentarily supporting Peiping in its border dispute with India. The same tendency is evident in Khrushchevʼs call for a truce in polemical warfare and efforts to arrange bilateral talks.

31. But while the Soviets can shelve an issue like Berlin simply by ceasing to agitate it, they have no means of unilaterally shutting off the Sino-Soviet dispute. The Chinese show no disposition to stop pressing their case, and Khrushchev is unwilling to make concessions important enough to allow the two to compose their differences for a time. The present attempts to convoke a meeting have been carried on in a remarkable public correspondence filled with uncompromising restatements of position and veiled threats and insults. We think that a conference, if it comes about, will at most result in a superficial compromise which would be highly vulnerable to the next turn of international events. Beyond these maneuvers, the general outlook is for a continuing and widening estrangement between the two powers in which both Soviet and Chinese nationalism will become increasingly prominent.

32. In southeast Asia, differences with China, which include differences over the tactics of “national liberation” struggle, have worked to complicate Soviet policy. Because of the important position of the North Vietnamese as the prime movers of Communist policy in both Laos and South Vietnam, the Soviets are probably increasingly reluctant to oppose North Vietnamese interests. The Soviets probably do not want to dissipate what influence they have in Hanoi by constant intervention over secondary questions of local tactics, particularly if in doing so they appear to be giving way to Western pressures. On the other hand, the Soviets have broader interests and problems which transcend those concerning Laos. Hence they would be loath to give the North Vietnamese or Chinese a free hand to decide Communist policy. On balance, even though the Soviets still probably prefer to maintain the Geneva settlement, we think that they will be unable to respond to US and British efforts to stabilize the Laotian situation unless US pressures induce the local Communists to seek Soviet support.



V. The Longer Run

33. It is wholly uncertain how long Soviet policy will focus on the tasks of consolidation designed to prepare for a renewed offensive against the non-Communist world. This depends on a number of factors, such as the situation in the top leadership, the success of the USSRʼs efforts to improve its relative military position, and the opportunities for forward action opened up by developments abroad. An aggravation of divisions in Europe and between Europe and the US, for example, would encourage the Soviets to pursue more actively the exacerbation of differences in the Western camp. General policy, moreover, might be heavily influenced by the need to respond to some unexpected turn of events, such as a successful Communist revolution in Latin America, the flaring up of a new Cuban crisis, or an escalation of armed conflict in southeast Asia.

34. In our last estimate of the future course of Soviet foreign policy,7 we examined the possibility of a gradual evolution in the Soviet world outlook which would diminish the importance of those conceptions of hostility derived from Communist ideology. At that time, we judged it possible that, over a quite unpredictable period of time, certain factors might force the Soviet leaders to adopt a more “normal” approach to world politics, one giving greater weight to national interests and conventional modes of international behavior as these are understood in the West, and less to the effort to expand indefinitely the area of Moscowʼs control. In this section, we reconsider the nature and influence of these factors: the course of developments inside the USSR, changing relations within the Bloc and the Communist movement, and the movement of events in the East-West competition.

35. Internal Developments. A year ago, we concluded that there was some prospect of an evolutionary trend inside the USSR which, by allowing public opinion to acquire a larger influence, would have some moderating effect on the Soviet world outlook. We have seen no significant movement over the last year, however, in the direction of involving wider circles of opinion, presumably closer to the aspirations of the general population, in Soviet policymaking. The regime has laid new economic burdens on the consumer and, in Cuba, carried the country into a risky and remote adventure irrelevant to the concerns and desires of the people. These actions have probably cost the regime some of the popular confidence and loyalty which it seeks, and the relatively bleak outlook for the consumer in 1963 raises the possibility that demonstrations of discontent may recur on the considerable scale of 1962. But these reactions do not endanger the bases of regime control, and the recent reaffirmation of military priorities in the allocation of economic resources confirms that they remain only one factor, and evidently not a decisive one, in the leadershipʼs choice of policies.

36. We attach considerable long-run importance, however, to the climate of opinion which, making use of the opportunities of de-Stalinization, has manifested itself among Soviet writers and artists. The recent works of the cultural intelligentsia, and their responses to critical attack, implicitly and sometimes even explicitly reject the legitimacy of party authority in the arts. More than this, in their strong affirmation of human values and their condemnation of the Stalinist past, they have formulated the hitherto unspoken question of the present leadershipʼs responsibility for the crimes of the 1930ʼs and 1940ʼs and, consequently, its fitness to rule today. Implicit in their revolt is also a repudiation of the way in which the party defines its historic mission and its allegation that the Western world is inevitably hostile to the USSR.

37. The regime has shown a special sensitivity to the intellectualsʼ contention that the older generation does not deserve the respect of its sons. It senses in this not only a criticism of individuals, but a repudiation of the political achievements of the revolution to date. Current measures of repression reflect party fears that these attitudes are spreading to other groups, and there are signs that some students and scientific-technical workers share the artistsʼ outlook. In the face of the present crackdown and demands for recantation, many of the rebellious artists may not be able to sustain the collective insubordination which their current silence represents. We believe, however, that their alienation from the party leadership as presently constituted is profound, and that it will continue to find expression so long as the regime remains unwilling, as it appears to be at present, to resort to repressions which truly terrorize.

38. Relations in the Communist World. In the past year, events have forced the Soviet leadership to move considerably further away from the traditional Communist view of Moscow as the undisputed center and order-giver for the entire world movement. Even as they look beyond Mao Tse-tung to his successors, they have little hope of being able to restore unity of action with Communist China or to be relieved of the necessity to combat its independent influence in parties and movements which earlier were exclusive Soviet preserves. By force of various circumstances, they have had to extend a special status to Cuba in the socialist camp and to watch Albania, North Korea, North Vietnam, and the parties in non-Communist Asia move varying distances out of their sphere of influence. In pursuing a rapprochement with Tito, they have had to compromise their old demands of hegemony.

39. In all these ways the Soviets, responding to a pluralistic and contradictory world, are practicing a political give-and-take which has less and less relation to traditional techniques of Stalinist manipulation and to the blacks and whites of Stalinist thought. We believe that this process within the Communist movement has an eroding effect upon the basic Soviet view of world politics as essentially a bipolar struggle of camp against camp. The private discourse of Soviet citizens and officials frequently reflects a recognition that, in some matters, Soviet interests parallel those of the West rather than those of Communist China. It would be wrong, we think, to interpret this trend as leading in the direction of a common Soviet-Western front against China. But it is not unreasonable to expect that the loosening of relationships inside the Communist world will be a significant factor tending to diminish the ideological ingredient in the Soviet outlook upon the non-Communist world.

40. The Course of East-West Competition. In our last estimate, we singled out the success or failure which the USSRʼs foreign policy encounters as perhaps the most significant factor affecting the Soviet outlook on the outside world. Since that time, the record contains much more failure than success, but we do not perceive signs of any fundamental Soviet reappraisal of the validity of their key doctrines. We continue to believe, however, that the prolonged frustration of Soviet objectives, particularly the more ambitious aims having to do with a world-wide conflict of systems, holds some promise over the long run of bringing the USSR around to a view which accepts the permanence of a pluralistic world. Conversely, it seems certain that successes in expanding Soviet influence, major weakenings in Western positions, and in particular any further advances of direct Communist rule will act to confirm the more far-reaching hopes and expectations of the Soviet leaders.

41. It is possible, however, that the experience of prolonged failure to advance toward Communist objectives would bring to the fore the more dogmatic elements in the Soviet outlook. But even if ideological hostility should diminish in the long run, this would not bring an end to international conflicts of interest or necessarily reduce the danger of general war. On the contrary, even in these circumstances the requirements of Soviet national security, prestige, and ambition, as seen by the Soviet leaders and people, would still bring the USSR into frequent collision with the interests of other states. The most that could be expected would be that some issues would become more tractable and negotiable, particularly those not deeply rooted in the national interests of the Soviet state, and that the occasional recognition of a measure of common interest with the West would not invariably be stifled by ideological hostility.



VI. The Question of Succession

42. A key uncertainty surrounding future Soviet policy arises from the problem of the succession to Khrushchev. The style, skill, and conceptions of the top leader still play a major role in determining Soviet choices and in the effectiveness with which policies are prosecuted. We think, for example, that Khrushchevʼs personal views and attributes have been of major importance in shaping Soviet policies over the past decade, and that the USSR under a different leader might have posed significantly different problems to the US.

43. The Soviet Party appears to be no better equipped with an accepted mechanism for the designation of a successor and his orderly assumption of power than it was a decade ago. The most likely sequence of events, in our view, is a repetition of the post-Stalin experience, in which the late leaderʼs senior associates conduct a struggle for supremacy behind a facade of collectivity. The main arena of conflict will be the leading party organs, but unless a single figure can gain control fairly soon, the contenders will probably try to bolster their strength by appealing to important interest groups outside the professional party apparatus. Of these groups, we believe that the economic administration, weakened by continuing reorganizations, will be an even less important political counter than when Malenkov tried to use it after 1953, and the police would probably become a significant factor only in the event that a succession struggle was prolonged and was accompanied by popular unrest which enlarged the role of the security forces.

44. There is some reason to believe, however, that the military leadership will be a substantial factor in post-Khrushchev maneuvering for power. The special efforts to rehabilitate Stalinʼs military victims and military attempts to maximize their own credit for World War II victories point to a strong sense of corporate identity among the senior officers, although we also have evidence of conflicts among the marshals. More important, the military leadership in the last two years has increasingly asserted its own views, not always unanimous, on questions of military doctrine and strategy; at times it has seemed even to be giving its opinions a more general political import as well. We do not believe that the military aspires to an independent political role in Soviet politics, but if, as we expect, the military and economic choices facing the USSR become more acute, the senior officers will probably find themselves more deeply involved in matters of general policy. Indeed, there are some present indications of party alarm on this score, and it is possible that, before the succession question arises, steps will be taken to restrict the political role of leading military personalities.

45. We know little about the individual policy views of Khrushchevʼs colleagues. It is clear, however, that the leadership is frequently divided over policy issues, and the record of the succession struggles after Lenin and Stalin indicates that divergent views on policy are heavily involved in innerparty competition. So long as present trends continue in the economy, in the relationship of East-West military power, in Bloc relations, and in Soviet fortunes abroad, Khrushchevʼs heirs will confront a number of acute issues and decisions. His departure would make it easier to ditch some policies to which his personal prestige has been attached. But it would aggravate most problems by bringing about an inevitable temporary reduction of Soviet prestige, a loss of authority in the Communist movement, and a general uncertainty in the country.

46. In such circumstances, it is normal for Soviet politicians to subordinate their own views to expediency and to espouse those policies which seem most likely to serve their personal ambitions. At the same time, a powerful weapon in this competition is a comprehensive program which a leader can represent as promising solutions to a broad range of problems confronting the regime; to be without a program is a grave weakness. Thus contenders for power are under pressure to formulate competing proposals, designed to appeal to politically important groups, on a number of issues. Initially the tendency would probably be for more conservative elements to gain predominance, but the longer a succession struggle remains unresolved, the more tendency there would be for a wider range of alternative policies to be given active consideration. This tendency creates the likelihood that, if the struggle was protracted, the circle of political participation would also widen as rivals reached out beyond the party elite for support.

47. Because of these factors, the period ushered in by Khrushchevʼs departure may present special opportunities and dangers to the US. Relations with the non-Communist world, and particularly with the leading rival power, are likely to be among the prime issues in any political competition, since these are intimately related to military problems, economic difficulties, and the key questions of China and Germany. We think it very unlikely that a “war party” will emerge in the Kremlin; there is no evidence that other leaders take a less sober view than Khrushchev of the consequences of nuclear war, and indeed some information indicates that the military regard the USSR as inadequately prepared at present to engage in one. But a faction may form which seeks to meet the problems of internal discontent and Chinese pressure by placing greater stress on factors of tension in East-West relations. It is also possible that a succession struggle would generate arguments for some accommodation with the West as a means of coping with these same problems. At any rate, the US will almost certainly be assailed with contrary indications, all of them difficult to interpret, and some of them suggesting that important changes are possible depending on the attitude adopted by the West. If Khrushchevʼs departure occurs at a time when existing policies are enjoying poor results, the succession period may in fact offer unusual chances for movement in Soviet policy.





* * *



* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Intelligence Estimates. Secret. Submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by the U.S. Intelligence Board on May 22. A Table of Contents and Principle Conclusions are not printed. A copy was included in the Presidentʼs weekend reading file.

1 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, does not consider the reasons listed sufficiently describe the basis for Soviet military policy decisions. He would insert the following sentence at this point:

This would be in furtherance of a basic Soviet military policy objective of building by such means as become available toward achievement of a military superiority over the West. [Footnote in the source text.]



2 For text of Khrushchevʼs speech on January 16, see Pravda or Izvestia, January 17, 1963.

3 For text of the Franco-German treaty, signed at Paris, January 22, 1963, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pp. 486-488.

4 A fuller discussion will be given in the forthcoming NIE 85-63, “Situation and Prospects in Cuba,” Secret. [Footnote in the source text. For text of the conclusions of NIE 85-63, see Document 331 and Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XI, pp. 834-836.

5 For a detailed discussion of Soviet policy in the Middle East, see recent NIE 11-6-63, “The Soviet Role in the Arab World,” dated 24 April 1963, Secret. The USSRʼs approach to Africa is examined in NIE 11-12-62, “Trends in Soviet Policy Toward Sub-Saharan Africa,” dated 5 December 1962, Secret. [Footnote in the source text; neither printed. (Department of State, INR-NIE Files)]

6 For an examination of Soviet aid to these countries see NIE 10-63, “Bloc Economic and Military Assistance Programs,” dated 10 January 1963, Secret. [Footnote in the source text; not printed. (Ibid.)]

7 NIE 11-9-62, “Trends in Soviet Foreign Policy,” dated 2 May 1962, Secret. [Footnote in the source text; printed as Document 187.]





327. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, June 1, 1963, noon.

3039. During private conversation among Dobrynin, Smirnovsky, DCM and me at Spaso yesterday evening, both Dobrynin and Smirnovsky pressed importance of substantive forward movement in conversations starting July 28 with Secretary. Questioned as to relation these talks with Sino-Soviet discussions starting July 5 both claimed latter would have no effect on US-Soviet talks which should be considered independently, with emphasis on necessity progress in US-Soviet dialogue. Both made effort play down influence Sino-Soviet discussions on US-Soviet relations, emphasizing fact Secretaryʼs visit would take place later. Otherwise refused to be drawn out on Moscow-Peiping conflict.

Dobrynin pressed for Secretary to have concrete proposals of some kind (without specifying subject) for his conversations with “highest” Soviet officials. While declining to indicate Soviet preparedness make similar positive suggestions, he emphasized that Secretaryʼs visit could not be considered sheer formality. Practical results would have to be expected and mere repetition shop-worn positions could actually result in set-back our relations.

Dobrynin was not sure as to relationship proposed nuclear discussions and Secretaryʼs visit, but accepted these might be considered preparatory. He pressed as to identity high-level representatives and I said no information beyond that conveyed orally to Khrushchev on occasion delivery Presidentʼs original letter. When he suggested might be Foster, I agreed this possibility.

Dobrynin failed to react to mention of Berlin. As regards nuclear test ban, he reiterated well-established line (including having reviewed with Kuznetsov at New York latterʼs cable re US agreement to two or three inspections) of Soviet disappointment (even, perhaps, dismay, when Soviet offer, which had been based on conviction it would be sufficient to finalize matter, was not accepted. Dobrynin and Smirnovsky both played on theme that this had been serious set-back for those in government who advocate desirability and possibility of finding areas of agreement with the United States).

As regards specifics Secretaryʼs visit, Dobrynin indicated they expected initiative from us as to timing and method announcement. He understood Secretary preferred about three days, including one day at Leningrad. Dobrynin noted that whereabouts Khrushchev might affect this schedule—if he in south an additional day or so might be desirable. (In conversation with DCM, Smirnovsky stated that there would be no difficulty about communications in event Khrushchev talks took place outside Moscow since twice daily courier plane would probably be arranged.)

Earlier conversation was devoted (by Dobrynin) largely to subject District of Columbia permission Soviet Embassy proceed with building plans—with heavy emphasis on reciprocity and Soviet Governmentʼs preparedness proceed with our large building project if their Washington deal approved.

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL US-USSR. Top Secret; Priority; Eyes Only.





328. Editorial Note


On June 10, 1963, President Kennedy delivered a speech on world peace at American University in Washington. He called for a reexamination of the U.S. attitude toward the Soviet Union, the cold war, and toward peace itself and for a recognition that total war made no sense in the nuclear age. He asserted that “both the United States and its allies, and the Soviet Union and its allies, have a mutually deep interest in a just and genuine peace and in halting the arms race.” We should “not be blind to our differences—but let us also direct attention to our common interests and to the means by which those differences can be resolved.” He announced that “high level discussions will begin shortly in Moscow looking toward early agreement on a comprehensive test ban treaty”; and “to make clear our good faith and solemn convictions on the matter,” he declared that “the United States does not propose to conduct nuclear tests in the atmosphere so long as other states do not do so. We will not be the first to resume.” For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pages 459-464.

In a meeting in Moscow on July 26—the day after the limited test ban treaty had been initialed—Chairman Khrushchev told Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Harriman that the Presidentʼs “June 10 speech was best statement made by any President since Roosevelt.” Khrushchev expressed the hope that the “President would consolidate his position on basis that speech. Positions expounded in that speech were good and strong but should be made even stronger; those positions promised yield good dividends both for President personally and for US in general.” For text of telegram 365 from Moscow, July 27, in which Harriman reported on the conversation, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 856-863.





329. Transcript of Comments by Director of Central Intelligence McConeSource


Washington, June 11, 1963, 1:30 p.m.

[Here follow questions and answers on subjects other than the Soviet Union.]

Q. You gave as the mission of CIA the double function of evaluating both capabilities and intentions. In your rundown on Russia vis-à-vis Western Europe, you gave us a good picture of its capabilities in Western Europe. I would be interested in your evaluation as to the Russian intentions in Western Europe, particularly with reference to Berlin, which at the moment seems to be quiescent. What is your evaluation of their intentions in Western Europe?

DCI: Yes, Berlin is quiet at the present time. We do not think that the Soviets intend to move militarily in Western Europe in the foreseeable future. We observe them in a high state of readiness, but we see no actions which we would interpret as an intention to move militarily, nor to move into Berlin and to accept the resultant confrontation. Now their policy with respect to Berlin blows hot and cold, and I think is adjusted from time to time because of internal pressures on the communist hierachy in Moscow. We believe that as of the present time they are pretty well consumed with internal problems, they are beset by the Soviet-Sino split, they are giving some considerable attention to their 6,000 mile border, and we think that all of these account for a rather quiet period. We see not very much in the way of threats. Occasionally they rattle a missile or trot out a hundred megaton bomb, or make a provocative statement at a Moscow cocktail party to some worried diplomat. But generally speaking the type of threat and extreme statement of the last few years are not present at the moment. We attribute this to internal problems which have them somewhat divided and hence not quite as decisive as they have been in the past.

[Here follow questions and answers on subjects other than the Soviet Union.]



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DCI (McCone) Files, Speeches: Job 80-B01285A. Secret. The source text is a transcript of a question and answer session following McConeʼs remarks to the Army War College National Strategy Seminar.





330. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, June 11, 1963, 5 p.m.

3128. Deptel 2687.1 I fear our session last night, at Foreign Ministry (former Kalinin) dacha did not advance things much along lines of your suggestion. Dep Fon Min Kuznetsov and wife joined party as late starters and this did not exactly loosen up the talk. While friendly toward us in general, he speaks with some bitterness about his “failure” in disarmament field, saying he tried not to cause trouble for his friend Dean, but the latter did not do as much for him. Particularly in after-dinner conversation among the men he was tense and insistent, reiterating at every turn Soviet Governmentʼs desire to find some ground for agreement with U.S. in international and/or bilateral areas.

As one of those members of Soviet Government so often mentioned by Dobrynin as believing it possible and desirable find means of agreement with U.S. in face scepticism others in Government seems likely his hard attitude may have been purposefully assumed to impress upon us essentiality of positive results in forthcoming meetings—a theme that was recurrent in conversation.

In response my specific inquiry (per reftel) Dobrynin said his consultations here had not changed but rather confirmed his remarks to you on boat ride.2 Even so we took a turn around the field with Kuznetsov carrying main burden for Soviet side. While Soviets insisted U.S. must come forward with new ideas or proposals if talks were not just falsely to raise and then disillusion peopleʼs hopes, challenge and prodding from our side elicited no indication anything new to be expected from them, or even a hint as to what they really look for from us.

On tests insisted on-site inspection not necessary and that this proved by objective facts of improved identification techniques of which confirmation exists in U.S. detection and identification single Soviet underground shot and general detection and identification French Sahara shot. Outstanding questions in test ban treaty are purely political and can only be resolved as such.

Disarmament mentioned only briefly with no indication of new Soviet thinking.

Germany and Berlin received standard treatment with usual references to elimination “NATO occupation”. Dobrynin seemed ready discuss question further but Kuznetsov did not pick him up on it. No indication of any early Soviet action or initiative in Berlin.

Non-aggression pact was injected by Dobrynin as possible area of agreement.

In bilateral matters, Kuznetsov pressed hardest on trade discrimination, list of concrete examples of which he said he passed over during Washington visit but apparently received no attention. (“Comrade” Smirnovsky was instructed provide Embassy with copy.) Insisted groups in U.S. including “State Dept,” erroneously believed U.S. economic pressures could cause Soviet structure to crumble. Wide diameter pipe only most recent example falsity this view. Trade in itself not specially important but trade discrimination clear reflection of basic U.S. Government attitude to relations with U.S.S.R.

Most heated remarks related to Cuba. Why does U.S. Government think it has right to dictate to Cuban people and so forth. Questioned as to whether Soviet Government realizes price it paid in terms US/Soviet relations with outcome Castro visit to U.S.S.R., Kuznetsov maintained and reiterated Soviets doing more and paying higher price for hoped for improvement relations with U.S. than anywhere else in its foreign relations. Conversation got to point where Soviets seemed to be putting question would U.S. have preferred Cuba aligned with China and therefore wasnʼt price paid in interests U.S.?

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Kohler Papers: Lot 71 D 460, Telegrams. Top Secret; Priority; Eyes Only. Drafted by McSweeney and initialed by Kohler.

1 Not found.

2 See Document 323.





331. Editorial Note


On June 14, 1963, the intelligence community issued NIE 85-63, “Situation and Prospects in Cuba,” which stated: “On balance, we estimate that there has been little or no reduction in overall military capabilities in Cuba since the end of the missile crisis. The Soviet military picture in Cuba is in transition with a scaling down of their forces becoming apparent. The total Soviet military strength in Cuba is now estimated to be about 12,000 to 13,000, but we cannot exclude the possibility that there could be several thousand more. The Soviets remain in control of the key weapons systems, while training the Cubans to operate some of them. We believe the Soviets have told the Cubans that they intend eventually to turn various weapons systems over to them. This is not to say that all Soviet military personnel will be withdrawn from Cuba; indeed, it is highly likely that the Soviets will maintain a significant presence there.” The estimate also stated that it was “unlikely that the USSR contemplates an attempt to reintroduce strategic missiles in Cuba. Continued US aerial surveillance remains a major deterrent. We cannot, however, altogether rule out such an attempt.” For text of the estimateʼs conclusions, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XI, pages 834-836.





332. Editorial Note


On June 14, 1963, the Committee of Principals discussed the upcoming trip to Moscow by Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Harriman, whom Kennedy had designated as his personal representative at the three-power test ban talks that would begin July 15. According to the memorandum of conversation, “Rusk said that the Harriman mission was not based on indications that the Soviets were prepared to move toward the kind of treaty we wanted,” but “the President feels the mission should be made because this may be our last chance to avoid a larger and more difficult arms race.” On June 20 Carl Kaysen, Presidentʼs Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs, sent President Kennedy a paper suggesting positions that Harriman should take. The paper argued that the initial part of the talks should deal with a comprehensive test ban treaty but noted that the U.S. offer to sign a treaty banning tests in the atmosphere, underwater, and in space remained open, and conceded that a partial test ban treaty might be the best solution obtainable in the current international climate. In that case, the United States might want to seek a limitation on underground tests. For text of both documents, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 719-726 and 728-733.





333. Editorial Note


On March 29, Charles C. Stelle, the Acting U.S. Representative to the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee, proposed the establishment of a special communication link between Washington and Moscow. For text of this proposal, see U.N. doc. ENDC/PV.115, pages 13-20, or Documents on Disarmament, 1963, pages 127-133. In response, on April 5, Semen K. Tsarapkin, the Acting Soviet Representative, stated that the Soviet Union was prepared to consider the establishment of a direct communications link. For text of this statement, see U.N. doc. ENDC/PV.118, pages 48-53, or Documents on Disarmament, 1963, pages 156-160. The same day the Department of State Press Spokesman welcomed this statement and stated that the direct communications link would reduce the risk of war and be available for immediate use during crises. (American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, page 522)

In the following days the United States and the Soviet Union agreed that discussion of the question should begin in Geneva on May 6. At the first meeting Stelle and Tsarapkin exchanged papers outlining the technical details of the communication link. Negotiation of the agreement and its technical annexes continued until June 20 when the two Acting Representatives signed the “Hot Line” agreement. For its text, see Documents on Disarmament, 1963, pages 236-238; documentation on the negotiations is in Department of State, Central Files, CR 12-3 US-USSR.

On July 30 the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs, McGeorge Bundy, sent NSAM No. 255 to the Secretaries of State and Defense detailing the instructions governing the use of the “Hot Line.” After stating that the major terminal for the line would be in the National Military Command Center at the Pentagon, NSAM No. 255 outlined the procedures for sending and receiving messages, and charged the Secretary of Defense with installing, staffing, and maintaining the necessary equipment for it. ( Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAMs, or Department of State, S/S-NSC Files, NSAMs: Lot 72 D 316)





334. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, June 21, 1963.

Sino-Soviet Gulf Widens as “Unity” Talks Near

Recent declarations and actions by both the Chinese and Soviet Communist parties reinforce the conclusion that there is virtually no prospect of resolving any of their substantive differences in their bilateral talks opening on 5 July. The Chinese in their belated reply to Moscowʼs 30 March letter,1 again forcefully demonstrated that they are not coming to the meeting in a spirit of compromise. The Soviets, more in deeds than in words, have indicated that there is no give in their position either.

New Attacks From Peiping

On 15 June, the Chinese delivered to the Soviets what will probably be the last in the exchange of letters between them before the “unity” meeting convenes in Moscow. The timing of the letter2 and some of its statements suggest that it was planned to coincide with the opening of the Soviet central committee plenum opening on 18 June. However, its content over-all—a long, intransigent position paper, insulting in tone and bristling with unconcealed attacks on the Soviet party—seems intended more for the international Communist movement than for Moscow. The letter not only was printed in Peopleʼs Daily on 17 June, but was immediately broadcast around the world and has been published, along with the other letters in the series, in a pamphlet which will undoubtedly be widely distributed wherever Peiping feels it can exert an influence.

This last letter was an attempt by the Chinese to define more sharply the differences between themselves and the “modern revisionists” over 25 points of “principle” which they feel should be discussed at the Moscow meeting. The issues range widely, from the mistaken view of general policy the Chinese profess to see in Soviet words and actions; through the USSRʼs incorrect tactics in foreign policy, its mishandling of problems in the international Communist movement, and its exercise of “great-nation chauvinism” in respect to other Communist regimes; to the degeneration of Marxism-Leninism in Soviet domestic doctrine and society.

Peipingʼs decision to set forth in so stark a fashion its rigid, fundamentalist views in opposition to the somewhat more liberal, pragmatic Soviet approach reflects its arrogant confidence, perhaps over-confidence, that in the contest the tide of opinion within the movement is flowing in the direction of China. The Chinese methodology resembles Leninʼs constant insistence on clearly marking the boundaries between himself and the Menshiviks in their earlier disruptive no-holds-barred ideological battle.

This approach entails some danger for the Chinese. Earlier in the dispute, they generated a great deal of sympathy for their views when they concentrated on fewer issues and presented them in a more generalized fashion. Now that the range has been extended to Soviet practices and views, the possibility of equivocation on the part of other Communist parties has been narrowed.

Moscowʼs Restrained Reply

The Soviet party apparently continues to believe that it can best prevent the Chinese from adding to their past successes in the international Communist movement by maintaining its righteous pose as the champion of courtesy and “unity.” On 18 June, the Soviets published a statement3 noting receipt of the letter, regretting its tone and distortions, and expressing the hope that the Chinese, like the Soviet Union, would “concentrate their efforts on what unites” the two parties rather than on what separates them. The statement also explained that the USSR at this time would not publish the letter—which, like earlier Chinese communications, taunted the Soviets for their failure to publish Peipingʼs views as the Chinese publish attacks on themselves—since it would only lead to a renewal of bitter polemical exchanges, which have aided in Chinese efforts to undermine Soviet leadership.

In fact, for the most part, the USSR has lived up to its self-proclaimed ban on polemical attacks. While firmly maintaining its well-known positions, so contrary to what the Chinese preach, and continuing its efforts, as in its extravagant wooing of Castro last month, to solidify support from others, it has not returned to the peak pitch reached just before the East German party congress in January. Its actions, however, or in some cases its refusal to act, have proved that it remains as intransigent as the Chinese and consequently have infuriated Peiping.

Soviet Foreign Policy Moves

The Soviet-Yugoslav rapprochement, one of the key exhibits in the Chinese case for Soviet revisionism, has continued to prosper, with Moscow even praising Yugoslaviaʼs new and controversial “socialist” constitution. A recent report from a diplomat in Belgrade states that a Yugoslav delegation will be in Moscow around 1 July to negotiate a role for Yugoslavia as observer in the bloc economic organization CEMA.

Soviet actions with respect to India also continue to contain a heavy anti-Chinese flavor. In addition to its un-Marxist “neutrality” in the Sino-Indian border question and its continuing deliveries of aircraft to the Indians, Moscow now has reportedly offered them new military equipment, which they would put to use in any future skirmishes with the Chinese on the border. The Indians plan to send a technical mission to Moscow on 1 July, as suggested by the Soviets, and plan, for their own purposes, to ensure that the Chinese know of their visit.

In agreeing to meetings with US high-level negotiators in Moscow on 15 July for further discussion of a nuclear test ban, the USSR has shown in another field that it will pursue its own policies with little regard for Chinese feelings or views. Although prospects are slim for any better results in these than in earlier talks, Peiping views with deep disapproval any Soviet negotiations with the West on this and related subjects.

All these delegations to discuss agreements with the USSR, which the Chinese view as inimical to their own interests, will be in Moscow at approximately the same time as the two Communist regimes face each other across their negotiating table. Such a juxtaposition does not appear at all accidental and certainly will not appear so to the Chinese.

Some of the Soviet actions have been met by the Chinese with an eloquent silence. Although the final Soviet-Cuban communiqué was printed by Peopleʼs Daily there was no comment by Peiping on Castroʼs month-long trip in the Soviet Union. Prior to that trip, Castroʼs activities had been widely publicized by the Chinese. The forthcoming East-West negotiations in Moscow were dismissed by China with a two-line announcement.

Peipingʼs Unrestrained Restrictions

The Chinese are coldly vituperative about other matters, however. They have issued a constant stream of protests alleging Indian violations of Chinese territory, apparently building up a case of innocent injured party, and they have again accused a “certain socialist country” of failing to support a socialist ally when attacked by a bourgeois country. On 16 June, they editorialized on the failure of the Geneva Conference co-chairmen (theUSSR and the UK) to condemn alleged Western and US violations of the agreements on Laos. The editorial was obviously intended to demonstrate for other Communist parties the sharp contrast between the proper Chinese support for militancy in a revolutionary situation and the improper Soviet caution.

It is on the question of Yugoslavia that the Chinese have vented their full anger. After republishing an earlier Tito speech which had set forth Yugoslaviaʼs views of Chinese errors, Peopleʼs Daily on 15 June savagely attacked Yugoslav revisionism, carefully tarring the Soviet Union with the same brush by implication. The Chinese proclaimed that Titoʼs views were but “spittle collected from the cuspidors of the imperialists and other revisionists”—an obvious reference to Khrushchev.

Both sides nevertheless continue to pay lip service to the need for “unity” and proclaim loudly that they each are working to that end. Both are apparently still ready to meet on 5 July as if that meeting could be meaningful in terms of unity. The Chinese were the more honest, however, in their editorial on Tito when they boldly said that their dispute with the revisionists was “irreconcilable.”4



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Secret; No Foreign Dissem/Background Use Only. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 2-4 of the issue.

1 For text, see Current Digest of the Soviet Press, vol. XV, No. 14, May 1, 1963, pp. 3-9.

2 For text, see ibid., No. 28, August 7, 1963, pp. 3-15.

3 For text, see ibid., No. 23, July 3, 1963, p. 4.

4 In the July 26 issue, the Current Intelligence Weekly Review reported that “after two weeks of futile and probably acrimonious meetings in Moscow, the Chinese Communists have returned home clearly determined to carry on with the war. The Russians, no less determined, have acted quickly to tighten their lines in preparation for continued conflict.” (Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A)





335. Editorial Note


Chairman Khrushchev, speaking in Berlin on July 2, 1963, expressed Soviet “readiness to conclude an agreement on the cessation of nuclear tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water.” He also contended that “it would be advisable straightaway, when an agreement on the cessation of nuclear tests is concluded, to take also another big step towards the relaxation of international tension”: conclusion of a non-aggression pact between the North Atlantic Treaty Organization countries and the Warsaw Pact countries. For text, see Documents on Disarmament, 1963, pages 244-246.

At a meeting of the National Security Council on July 9, according to the summary record, “Secretary of State Rusk said our objective is to continue to try for a comprehensive test ban treaty, accepting a three-environment treaty only as a first step.” Rusk also raised the question of defining “underground tests and atmospheric tests in such a way as to make clear when an underground test becomes an atmospheric test.” Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Director Foster replied that definitions of these tests were contained in the draft treaty (which banned tests “if such explosion causes radioactive debris to be present outside the territorial limits of the State” conducting the test). Seaborg stated that “our present underground tests would be legal under this definition.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 779-785.

Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Harrimanʼs instructions for his mission were issued the following day. “Our judgment that a test ban treaty is in the national interest rests on two grounds. First, it may be a significant first step toward the halting of the arms race and thus reduce international tensions. Second, and more important, it is an indispensable first step toward the limitation of the further diffusion of nuclear weapons.” The instructions continued, “Khrushchevʼs speech makes it unlikely that we can reach agreement with the Soviets on a comprehensive treaty at this time. Therefore, we should seek an agreement banning testing in three environments along the lines of the August 27, 1962, draft treaty.” Harriman was also instructed to separate the non-aggression arrangements proposed by Khrushchev from the test ban treaty and other disarmament matters. For text of the instructions, see ibid., pages 785-788. For text of the August 27, 1962 draft treaty, see Documents on Disarmament, 1962, volume II, pages 804-807.





336. Editorial Note


In a memorandum to Secretary of State Rusk, July 4, 1963, Department of State Counselor Rostow proposed that Harriman during his mission to Moscow inform the Soviets that “we have firm evidence that the Viet Minh are violating the Geneva Accords by their continued presence in Laos and infiltration of South Vietnam” and that “unless Viet Minh troops are withdrawn and infiltration ceases we shall shortly have to take compensatory action against North Vietnam.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume III, pages 454-455. During his negotiations in Moscow, Harriman asked Chairman Khrushchev to attempt to restrain North Vietnamese activity in Laos but did not address the issue of Laos as an infiltration corridor into South Vietnam. For more information, see ibid., page 454, footnote 2.





337. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, July 22, 1963, 1 p.m.

251. Bonn telegram to Department 284.1 This Embassy has been consistent supporter of allied action to prevent sale of wide diameter pipe to Soviets and believe success to date has been significant both in terms direct strategic objective and perhaps equally importantly as manifestation essential NATO solidarity (despite known British softness) in area where Soviets could have expected and probably did expect commercial profit motives to outweigh any other considerations.

From strategic standpoint pipe making machinery sales now seem differ from pipe itself in at least following ways: 1. Lead time will probably be considerable—meantime existing pipe embargo will have continuing effect of slow down in pipe line installation.

2. Wide pipe production Soviet Union even with imported plants will continue to require diversion Soviet investment and steel from other uses.





From political standpoint it would seem unwise to nail ourselves to mast of attempted embargo of pipe making machinery which is unlikely to be successful and would at least lead to public airing of differences and bitterness within alliance, thus negating sizable and positive results of successful pipe embargo.

It would seem to us that major effort within NATO which would be required could better be applied to the question of credits in its broadest aspects, which would appear likely be serious problem particularly if expectable tendency to euphoria follows on any East/West agreement such as test ban.

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 12-3 USSR. Secret; Limited Distribution; Noforn. Repeated to Bonn.

1 Telegram 284, July 20, reported that the Federal Republic of Germany was unlikely to block the sale of pipe-making equipment to the Soviet bloc. (Ibid., STR 12-3 USSR-WGER)





338. Editorial Note


On July 15, 1963, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Harriman and Viscount Quinton Hailsham, British representative to the test ban treaty negotiations, met with Chairman Khrushchev in Moscow. In telegram 151 to the Department of State, July 15, Harriman reported that “Khrushchev stated that he would not permit any inspection in connection with the test ban, and withdrew the two or three inspections which he had previously proposed.” Harriman continued: “since there was obviously no use arguing point, Hailsham and I recorded that both our governments would prefer comprehensive test ban but that we would be prepared to agree to test ban in three environments without inspection, as a first step towards the comprehensive agreement.” Khrushchev suggested a series of other steps, such as “freezing of military budgets at 1963 levels” and an “agreement on level of armed forces now located in the FRG andGDR.” Khrushchev then agreed that France could be dropped from the Soviet draft of the test ban treaty as an original signatory after Harriman accepted his contention that it was important for France to join after the treaty had been concluded. Khrushchev did not press Harriman on a non-aggression pact. Harriman concluded: “It seems quite clear to me that Khrushchev is ready to go ahead with three environment test ban without NAP.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII, pages 799-801.

In telegram 195 to the Department, July 18, Harriman reported that he was “beginning to piece together a logical theory on why Khrushchev is interested in test ban at this time. Obviously, his first preoccupation is his battle with ChiComs and particularly effect on Soviet leadership of international Communist movement. Khrushchev wants to use the test ban treaty in this connection. Since he is unable to get the ChiComs to agree to join the test ban, he will attempt to isolate them. He will attempt to get the maximum number of nations to adhere to test ban treaty, thus leaving China isolated if possible as the only nation refusing to cooperate on this highly emotional subject to underdeveloped nations.” For text, see ibid., pages 808-809.

The limited test ban treaty was initialed on July 25 and signed in Moscow on August 5. For further information on the negotiations, see ibid., pages 801-856. For text of the treaty and the tripartite communiqué issued on July 25 at the conclusion of the negotiations, see Department of State Bulletin, August 12, 1963, pages 239-240. The treaty was ratified by the U.S. Senate on September 24; instruments of ratification were exchanged and the treaty entered into force on October 10.





339. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Moscow, July 26, 1963.

PARTICIPANTS

N.S. KHRUSHCHEV

W. Averell Harriman



Post Dinner conversation between Harriman and Khrushchev:

1. Khrushchev reminisced at length about Stalinʼs night-owl habits. Said they were killing. Stalin called Khrushchev at times to come to dinner at 2:00 a.m. Stalin slept like a horse all day—ate, and went to sleep again. Khrushchev said the great banquets of Stalin were a menace as they had to work all day. Khrushchev spoke of Stalin drinking too much at dinner for General De Gaulle in December 1944. (I was there and didnʼt think Stalin drank too much. General Dean, also present, had agreed. Khrushchev freely confessed he had gone to sleep during the movie. W.A.H.) Khrushchev commented Stalin thought he was God on earth, and used to say capitalists would strangle the USSR after his death. But here we were alive and drinking cognac with capitalists and they were not strangling the USSR. Also, Stalin was a very poor judge of people and in speaking of who would be his successor always pointed at Bulganin; Khrushchev said Bulganin was a nice man but not one possessing broad vision.

2. Re CEMA meeting which ended today, Khrushchev said it had gone very well and everybody had parted well satisfied. In response to Harrimanʼs question about Rumanians, Khrushchev said numerous press reports about the Rumanian situation were all beside the point. Even completely ignorant people could see that Soviet-Rumanian cooperation was not to USSRʼs unilateral advantage at Rumanian expense. Soviets had built something like ten or more plants in Rumania and were buying their products. If Soviets had wanted to draw unilateral advantage, they would have built those plants in their own country and would be now selling at a profit products produced by those plants to Rumania. The same situation applied to other Socialist countries in Europe. Commented that in capitalist countries, where there were difficulties with investing capital within the country, it was normal to export capital, but this was not the case with USSR. Reiterated what he had said at July 15 meeting with Harriman1 re Soviet plans for massive development of chemical industry, citing figures he had quoted at that meeting—6 billion rubles in chemical fertilizer and 11 billion in synthetics, all in about five or six years. Said Soviets wished buy chemical plant equipment in US, UK and other Western countries. Of course, US was now unwilling engage in trade with USSR but that would do no harm to Soviets; indeed his trade people told him that US produced equipment more expensive than similar equipment produced in UK, West Germany or Italy. He thought reason for that was that US had highest wages. Khrushchev saidUK, Germany, etc., were lending money for equipment new plants for five years. Now Soviets will not borrow except seven or even ten years, because now too many repayments.

3. Khrushchev commented Soviet relations with Afghanistan were very good and there were no difficulties whatsoever between two countries. Thought King of Afghanistan was a good man who understood problems correctly and was very modest and even shy.

4. Re Soviet-Iranian relations, Khrushchev said they had improved somewhat but they would be even better if US did not poke its nose in this area. When Harriman remarked Shah had just instituted great reforms in Iran, Khrushchev commented they were “bold reforms.” Said Shah had common sense but was too self-confident, which was bad if carried to extreme. Noted Soviets had some time ago settled border problems with Iran which had existed for 70 years. Said he had instructed his people to make concessions to Iran, telling them they would be only temporary as sooner or later Iran would have a Soviet regime and then there would be no problem. He said an eventual revolution in Iran was inevitable.

5. Harriman said Stalin told him he had little confidence in Mao. Khrushchev said USSR-Chinese relations were now of course aggravated, but prior to that they were better than relationship between Stalin and Mao. When Harriman referred to Soviet-Chinese border disputes, Khrushchev said that was due to fact that in some areas Soviet-Chinese border was still unmarked. Thought effort should be made to place markers along the border. Said some areas were indicated on Soviet maps as belonging to USSR and on Chinese maps as belonging to China. This was due to different interpretation of situation, but in any event only minor areas were involved. Later in conversation, Khrushchev commented that if the Chinese could get by without the USSR, Soviets could also get by without Chinese.

6. When Harriman referred to recent press reports that Chinese were preparing another invasion of India, Khrushchev said he had not seen such reports. Said Soviets had said privately and publicly they were opposed to Chinese attitude in this matter, which had made Chinese angry. Expressed hope Chinese would have enough common sense not to engage in invasion again as that would only harm cause of peace.

7. In response to Harrimanʼs question, Khrushchev, whispering in his ear, said no decision had yet been made as to who would be his successor. Said they were still weighing that decision, but commented Brezhnev (who was also at the table) was a very capable man, with background in engineering and with good knowledge of political and economic problems; also mentioned Podgorny as a very capable man. Noted, however, he had not lost hope that Kozlov would recover, although it was difficult to entertain such hope. Said Kozlov was paralyzed in his left side (both his left arm and left leg paralyzed) but could speak and his mind was clear. In any event, if Kozlov should recover, his recovery would take a long time.

8. Referring to Khrushchev remark during dinner that he wished send nice present to Attorney General Kennedy on occasion birth his eighth child, Harriman said to Khrushchev Attorney General would be most pleased if Khrushchev would allow Mr. Zaslovsky, husband of a very nice American girl, to join his wife in US. Said Zaslovskys were young people who were very much in love; Mrs. Zaslovsky, nee Stern, was now in USSR and wished very much be able return to her homeland with her husband. Harriman pointed out Attorney General was very much interested in this case.



Khrushchev said he knew nothing about this case. When Harriman turned to Gromyko, latter said he knew but preferred to say on this occasion that he did not. When Harriman repeated Attorney Generalʼs interest in this matter, Gromyko said he would use very convenient American phrase “I will look into it.”



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/Harriman. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Harriman. The conversation took place in the Catherine the Great Hall at the Kremlin.

1 Telegram 154 from Moscow, July 16, is a 20-page account of the July 15 meeting. (Ibid., DEF 18-3 USSR (MO)); reproduced in the microfiche supplement to Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VII.





340. Telegram From the Embassy in France to theDepartment of StateSource


Paris, July 27, 1963, noon.

443. Eyes only Secretary from Ambassador. I have had the opportunity of a good talk with Bill Tyler and I send you these views with some hesitation since I am sure they have already occurred to you. In addition I am admittedly drawing upon my many years of experience in the Soviet field and therefore stepping somewhat outside of my present area of responsibility. However, this is in the belief that my views on the consequences of the test ban agreement and certain caveats in connection with future deals with Soviets may be sufficiently useful to warrant the message. There is of course the added factor of the effect upon our European Allies and our European policy of the manner in which we conduct our future relations with the Soviet Union.

We should recognize that in itself the Soviet agreement to a test ban in the three environments represents no concession whatsoever on their part. I was particularly glad to see the President make this point so definitely in his speech of last night.1 We have therefore no moral or any other obligation to make any quid pro quo in any other field. I emphasize this point since I seem to detect in some of the Soviet propaganda a tendency to regard the test ban as a Soviet concession to be compensated for by the U.S. and U.K. in other fields, especially the non-aggression pact. This, as you well know is a favorite Soviet device to pretend concession where none exists in order to extract a quid pro quo when none is merited. In the circumstances it is extremely important that we so comport ourselves with our Allies to avoid any semblance of impression that we have incurred any indirect obligation with the Soviets in regard to non-aggression arrangements. We should also avoid any appearance of indecent or anxious haste in an attempt to move forward in the entire field of relations with the Soviet Union. It has never been true in Soviet policy and is not now true that certain occasions must be seized or the opportunity is lost. Soviet policy is too realistic and based upon long-range considerations for that. It is therefore not a question of seizing a temporary fleeting opportunity. In fact I should think that we should proceed very cautiously with any further discussions with the Soviet Union and wait for them to give us indications of any serious change in current Soviet policy and not feel that we must take the initiative in order “to show good faith”.

An approach such as I have outlined above seems to me extremely important to keep steady our relations in Europe, as there is a strong tendency, particularly in France, to believe that we are ready to patch up our differences with the Soviet Union, even at the expense of European interests. This I gather is also feared in Germany.

While I certainly would be the last person to wish to ignore any real or serious opportunity for a meaningful solution of any of the outstanding problems with the Soviet Union, I am sure you understand that if we are too single minded in our relentless pursuit of improvement in relations with the Soviet Union we will render correspondingly more difficult the problem of the development of Atlantic association and most of the questions at present before NATO.

There are certain other aspects of the general situation which I could touch upon, but I have selected only those points which appear to be most actual. If you consider it wise you might care to show this telegram to McBundy.

Bohlen



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 18-4. Secret.

1 For text of the Presidentʼs address to the American people on July 26, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 601-606.





341. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, July 31, 1963, 2 p.m.

404. Eyes only—Secretary. I believe it may be helpful to you as you prepare for your visit to Moscow to have Embassyʼs estimate as to subjects most likely on Sov agenda, as well as some suggestions on topics you may wish to raise. With this in mind, I submit following checklist of issues, together with an indication of predictable Sov positions and some ideas on how you may wish to respond: 1. NAP. As Khrushchev made clear in his July 261 letter to President, this will be likely first item on Sov agenda. I assume that principal point you will wish to make is that consultation with allies now in train and until process completed you have little to add to Harrimanʼs remarks on subject. Meanwhile, you may wish, before your departure, publicly to correct deliberate misinterpretation which Sovs have placed on communiqué2 both in Kʼs letter to President and in press commentary subsequent to initialing of test-ban pact—namely claim that in joint communiqué, US-UK agreed continue discussion of NAP following consultation with allies, whereas only commitment in communique is to consult with allies in view to further discussion of Sov NAP proposal. Secondly, you may wish to refer to Kʼs “corns” remarks to Harriman3 and point out irrelevancy of discussion of nonaggression commitments in atmosphere of threats against Berlin in communications of truly aggressive nature. Point here obviously is absence of logic and justice in Sov position which insists on NAP divorced from assurances that commitments would not extend to neuralgic point of Berlin. Finally, you may wish, in view of Kʼs remarks to Harriman on point, to set record straight on US position toward German borders.4

2. Partial measures. I think you should be in a position to say something about the partial measures which Khrushchev mentioned in his July 19 speech,5 if only to convey our ideas on forum for their further consideration. It seems to me that, while agreeing to preliminary discussion on a bilateral basis of partial measures, you would wish to point out that since they affect number of other countries, perhaps best forum for their systematic consideration would be Geneva 18-Nation Committee.

On first-step measures which we favor, such as nuclear cut-off and reduction stockpiles, you will have noted from Kʼs remarks to Harriman he has no interest whatever in latter and sees little merit in cut-off. It appears tough Sov position on both issues stems from refusal consider any measure which would involve more than bare minimum inspection, if that. On the question of non-dissemination, Sovs would reject any formula which in their view would seem to give their blessing to any German access to nuclear weapons, i.e., MLF and MNF. Thus, it seems clear Sov tactics will be to press for maximum commitment on our part re retention of control and will consider oral assurances on this question more satisfactory to them than any formal agreement.



3. Laos. As Harriman informed bluntly by Khrushchev, the Sov current position on Laos is that the co-chairmen and external signatoriesʼ responsibilities for fulfillment of the Geneva Accords have ended and that the problem in Laos is now an internal one, requiring for its solution agreement among the three Princes without interference from the outside. Obviously we should not permit the Sovs thus to shirk the responsibilities they assumed at Vienna, and I assume you will wish to press them again to deal more firmly with outside forces responsible for the current crisis, principally the North Vietnamese.

4. Cuba. While the Sovs are not likely to raise this subject, you may wish to restate for their benefit US policy toward Cuba and perhaps seek more concrete assurances on removal of Sov troops than thus far received. We should have no illusions on our chances of success in this area. Khrushchev must have paid a price for Castroʼs support of Sovʼs position in their dispute with ChiComs and his commitment in Cuba may permit him little maneuverability. Even so, it may be salutary to remind him that continued Sov attempts to shore up Castro, especially militarily, will inevitably cast deep shadow over US-Sov relations.

5. Trade. Trade is a hardy perennial which Sovs are bound to raise, especially in light of Presidentʼs indication in his letter of Oct 276 US would be prepared to review trade policy in event amelioration international situation. Sovs will undoubtedly argue agreement on test-ban is substantial fulfillment this condition. You will want to stress that it is the arbitrary trade practices of the Sov bloc and lack attractive exports which are primarily responsible for low-level trade and not, as Sovs always allege, US strategic trade controls. You will have noted recent Sov keen interest in development chemical industry, and, toward this end, expression of hopes of obtaining equipment from West. (At Kremlin yesterday, Khrushchev told Freeman he was prepared buy fertilizer, herbicide, and mixed-feed plants from us if price were right.)7 It would be helpful if you could here strike a positive note, preferably with some concrete indication shift in US policy with regard export equipment essentially directed to increase in benefits to Sov people, e.g., agricultural and consumers goods production. Moreover, I would think it desirable in our current examination of trade policy to consider how best we might further influence reorientation of Sov economic development, including distribution of resources in directions best calculated to advance long-term interests.





In addition above comments on broad issues, following thoughts on issues of strictly bilateral interest may be helpful: 1. Communications: I recommend you be prepared to follow up Harrimanʼs initiative with Gromyko by stressing importance in interest rapid communications of acquisition by Embassy of leased cable. According to Embassyʼs analysis of traffic during Harriman talks, average time for transmittal Washington-Moscow of messages bearing operational immediate designator was about three hours and for outgoing messages one and half to two hours, with maximum time being four hours in case of incoming messages and five and half hours in case of outgoing messages. In preparation for your discussion this subject, it might be useful for Department to make similar survey of time lag its outgoing and incoming messages. Naturally, our claim to special facilities would be strengthened if you were in a position to infer that unless favorable Sov reaction forthcoming you would regretfully be obliged to take steps to cut off or effect slow-down in US commercial facilities which now guarantee speedy and reliable communications to Sov Mission New York. A gentle hint of retaliation would do no harm, in my view.

2. Civil Air Agreement. As Gromyko has in past, Sovs may link our request for special communications facilities with Civil Air Agreement (see Embtel 1763).8 In Sov view—essentially correct, I believe—US is committed to inaugurate civil air service. You may wish confirm this also our understanding and give some indication as to when agreement may be implemented.

3. Exchanges. You may wish note that negotiations for extension current exchange agreement are scheduled for fall and express hope that Sovs will take positive attitude on expansion of program of mutually advantageous exchange of ideas and information. In this connection, you may wish to comment favorably on recent Sov cessation jamming VOA and point out while this encouraging development, much more needs be done in area of information exchange if genuine understanding among peoples, which Sovs profess to support, is to be achieved. Obviously your position on jamming question would be strengthened if, before hand, question of use of 173 kilocycle frequency could be settled satisfactorily (see Embtel 348).9

4. Egorov Case. Both Zorin and Kuznetsov have recently expressed to me deep Sov concern over Egorov case and possible repercussions on US-Soviet relations, and I would assume Gromyko will take equally vigorous line with you (see Embtel 241).10 I think you should be prepared to give detailed exposition US side of issue and, if possible, indicate possibility that once judicial process has run course, case may be disposed of in manner satisfactory to both sides.

5. Miscellaneous issues. I assume that you will wish to refer to our request for allocation of suitable tract for new embassy property, as well as perennial problem of exit visas for relatives US citizens. You may also wish to remind Sovs of our continuing interest in establishment consulates and consular convention, pointing out that we have heard nothing on subject since submitting our comments on Sov draft a year ago.





It has occurred to us that since we so rarely have opportunities for direct presentation our views and positions to Sov people, you may wish to consider desirability of soliciting Sov views on TV appearance. If you think well of idea, I would suggest that I approach Gromyko referring frequent Sov appearances American TV. It might be useful further to refer to usual practice of Secretary of State when abroad to hold press conference, and suggest this also be carried live on Sov TV. If Sovs should concur, I would think it useful for you to take opportunity to set forth in nonpolemical terms our concept of peaceful co-existence, which would mean above all a sincere plea for free exchange of ideas and information in interest mutual understanding. Since Sovs should be given as much advance notice as possible, I would hope you could give this suggestion your immediate attention.11

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, ORG 7 S. Secret; Operational Immediate.

1 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. VI, pp. 301-302.

2 See Document 338.

3 For a report of Khrushchevʼs remarks about stepping on U.S. corns in Berlin, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XV, pp. 543-544.

4 From 4:05 to 4:30 p.m., July 31, President Kennedy met with Harriman, McGeorge Bundy, and Kaysen to discuss Khrushchevʼs proposal for a non-agression pact. A tape recording of the meeting is at the Kennedy Library, Presidentʼs Office Files, Presidential Recordings, Tape 103/A39.

5 For text of this speech, see Pravda or Izvestia, July 20, 1963.

6 Reference is apparently to Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. VI, pp. 181-182; however, that letter contains no reference to trade.

7 A memorandum of Freemanʼs conversation with Khrushchev on July 30, largely devoted to comparisons of U.S. and Soviet agricultural practices and prospects, was transmitted as an attachment to airgram A-140 from Moscow, August 2. (Department of State, Central Files, ORG 7 AGR)

8 Dated January 18. (Ibid., 911.2161/1-1863)

9 Dated July 26. (Ibid., TEL 8-4USSR)

10 Dated July 21. (Ibid., UN 12 USSR) Ivan Egorov and his wife had been arrested in New York in June for attempting to obtain documents relating to U.S. defense. Telegram 241 reported Kuznetzovʼs representations to Kohler on the case at a reception on July 20.

11 On August 1 Rusk replied that Kohlerʼs suggestions had been “most helpful” and “exactly along the lines” of Washingtonʼs thinking. The Secretary of State, however, demurred on the holding of a formal press conference or appearance on Soviet television. (Telegram 420 to Moscow; ibid., ORG 7 S)





342. Memorandum of Meeting With President KennedySource


Washington, August 2, 1963, 10 a.m.

The President met with Secretary Rusk in the Cabinet Room to discuss the Secretaryʼs trip to Moscow. Also present were: Messrs. Ball, Harriman, Foster, Thompson, Bundy, Kaysen, Davis, Read. The meeting lasted for approximately 45 minutes.

The Secretary went through the points listed in Mr. Thompsonʼs memorandum of August 11 on the agenda for the Secretaryʼs visit to Moscow. The following points received particular emphasis in the discussions: 1. With respect to a ban on bombs in orbit (3e), the Secretary raised the difficulties that might arise if there were bilateral talks on this subject, while the test ban treaty ratification process was going on. The President agreed. However, he urged that we explore the possibility of reaching an agreement, rather than merely resting on independent parallel declarations, in a positive way. A final decision could be reserved for a later time.

2. On Laos (5), the Secretary indicated that his intention was to press the Soviets hard on this issue, pointing out their responsibilities and asking that they discuss with the Poles the need for a more cooperative attitude by their representative in the ICC. The President observed that it might be more useful to warn the Soviets that we will act if necessary in order to preserve the neutralist government. Faced with this prospect, the Soviets may be willing to try to do more under the Accords. In any event, they would be put on notice and have no legitimate basis for complaint or counter-action to any action we feel must be taken by us.

3. On Summitry (7), the President observed that it would be better if Khrushchev didnʼt come to theUN. The Secretary remarked on Gromykoʼs suggestion that the 20th anniversary meeting of the UN in 1965 be held at a Heads of State level. The President indicated this would be preferable to having Gromyko [Khrushchev?] coming this fall.

4. Trade (8). Mr. Ball pointed out the political restrictions on development of trade and the present legislative obstacles to its development. He also said that Russiaʼs desires were limited, but we could well meet them in the fields of technology. In response to the Presidentʼs question on whether there were trade experts in the Secretaryʼs party, the Secretary observed that it would be undesirable for us to appear to be pressing the trade subject with the Soviets at this time. There had already been some newspaper speculation about the connection between the test ban agreement and talks on trade which he thought it undesirable to encourage further. It was his judgment that the Senators in the party might well raise the issue informally, or respond favorably to Soviet questions on it.

5. On bilateral questions, (9) there was some discussion of the civil air agreement. The Secretary pointed out we were essentially committed to concluding the agreement, which we had already initialed, since the atmosphere was sufficiently improved over that of the summer of 1961. Mr. Thompson suggested that we go ahead on this after the ratification process. Mr. Harriman gave Kohlerʼs views on the desirability of concluding the agreement, as well as pointing out the irrelevancy of a bilateral agreement to our arguments with African and Latin American countries against accepting Soviet civil air routes. Our most persuasive argument in these places was the lack of reciprocal advantage to the host countries. Harriman also pointed out that Pan Am would like to wait for spring to begin service, to give time for promotion, which in their judgment was needed to make the route an economic proposition. The Secretary concluded by remarking that he proposed to take a positive attitude in this matter.

6. Cuba (10). The President said that he did not foresee any useful response from Khrushchev if we brought up Cuba again. Khrushchev would only repeat that U.S. and Cuba should normalize their relations. It is clear that while Khrushchev is looking for a detente in Europe, he proposes to increase the pressures in Latin America. (In reviewing this minute, the President said that of course the Secretary should raise the matter with Khrushchev just the same.)

7. The discussion then moved on to non-aggression arrangements (2). The President made a number of points. First, while there appeared to be little in such arrangements for us, we should keep an affirmative position and try to maintain the mood which Harrimanʼs visit created. On the other hand, it was clear that we had to get finished with the test ban treaty before we could do anything further on this subject. It was important to find out what the Soviets saw in this proposition, and whether such arrangements could give us additional security in Berlin.

8. He asked for Mr. Thompsonʼs comments, and Mr. Thompson pointed out the disadvantages of any non-aggression arrangement in its impact on the Allies and in particular the Germans. The President noted that Mr. Harriman had a different view and asked him to state it. Mr. Harriman pointed out the consequences of a detente in permitting a further loosening of ties between the satellites and the Soviet Union. This would apply to East Germany as well, and make more possible an improvement in the East German situation along the lines that Brandt had asked for. He spoke of Khrushchevʼs concern over a possible repetition of the 1953 uprising in East Germany, and urged that we had the same concern. Secretary Rusk commented on the Italian reaction to the proposals for a non-aggression pact in terms of this as a further step in legitimizing the Italian Communist Party.

9. The President observed that while Berlin was not now in trouble and in his judgment, did not seem likely to be in the near future, the connection between an improvement in the Berlin situation and a non-aggression pact was one that was useful for us to maintain in terms of our relations with the Germans. The President said that while it was important to deal with the West German problem, he thought that Kohlerʼs views were too negative, and we should have a more positive attitude. Mr. Thompson pointed out again the difficulties which a non-aggression pact would create in the Alliance and its effect in discouraging hope in East Germany, and suggested that if we ran up against a dead end in our negotiations with the Allies, we might try unilateral NATO declarations. On the other hand, he agreed that if we could make a gain in Berlin, it would be useful, and warned that it is likely that the Soviets will soon incorporate East Berlin into East Germany if they do not get a non-aggression pact. The Secretary doubted whether a mere declaration byNATO would answer Khrushchevʼs needs.

10. Discussion then turned to the problems of getting the Federal Republic to sign the test ban treaty. The President said he thought it is very important to get them to sign, both from a domestic point of view and from the point of view of the Soviets. There were some discussions of the way that the questions raised by the Germans in the last few days could be answered. The Secretary said that these questions reflected as much on Von Brentanoʼs political attitude toward Schroeder2 as they did the concerns of the German Government in general. The Secretary pointed out that while Von Brentano was Foreign Minister, Germany had adhered to several conventions to which East Germany had also adhered. Further, Secretary of State Dulles had taken note of East Germanyʼs adherence to the Prisoner-of-War Convention and stated that on this matter, the U.S. was in treaty relations with East Germany.





It was agreed that the Secretary should not say anything on East German adherence at the time the treaty was signed, in view of what the President had already said at his press conference.3 We could make it plain to the Soviets that we would treat East Germany as they proposed to treat Taiwan. It was left unclear as to whether this point should be communicated to the Federal Republic now, or wait till later.

CK



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR. Secret. A tape recording of the meeting is ibid., Presidentʼs Office Files, Presidential Recordings, Tape 103/A39.

1 Thompsonʼs memorandum stated that “the primary aim of the Secretaryʼs visit will be to probe Soviet intentions and to try to ascertain in what particular field further progress in resolving issues with the Soviet Union might be made.” (Ibid., Meetings and Memoranda Series, Meetings with the President) Points 2-10 briefly discussed non-aggression arrangements, disarmament, non-dissemination, Laos, Germany and Berlin, summitry, trade, bilateral questions, and Cuba, respectively.

2 Gerhard Schroeder, West German Foreign Minister, who replaced Heinrich von Brentano in October 1961.

3 For a transcript of the Presidentʼs press conference on August 1, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 612-619./3/





343. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, August 5, 1963, 1 a.m.

Secto 3. Uncleared memcon, subject revision, Noforn Distribution. US-UK bilaterals—Tactics in Gromyko/Khrushchev meetings. (Aug. 4) At British Embassy today, Secretary and Lord Home had general exchange of views on tactics to be followed in separate bilaterals as well as trilaterals with Gromyko and Khrushchev.

Secretary expressed view that principal purpose in upcoming talks with Sovs should be to prove whether Sovs genuinely interested in moving toward détente or simply at this point concerned with atmospherics. At same time, particularly in context Sov preoccupation with non-aggression pact, we should make clear we expect Sov compliance with existing commitments—e.g., Laos as well as Sov avoidance aggressive behavior in other potential trouble spots—e.g., Berlin. In any case we must be careful to avoid any impression of commitments re NAP or partial measures affecting Allies which would cause trouble particularly with Bonn and/or would hamper TB ratification process in US. Meanwhile, we should attempt in our tactical handling of proposals in which Sovs have indicated primary interest to avoid seeming completely negative and thus keep ball in play. Secretaryʼs recommendation would be: (1) Seek ascertain real Sov motivation for vigorous NAP campaign;

(2) Stress need for close consolation with Allies as precondition to further discussion beyond probing stage;

(3) Express interest in some Sov partial measures and seek clarification particularly on Sov proposals for exchange of observers and fixed-control posts, pointing out our reluctance to give favorable consideration such steps if narrowly confined—e.g., to Germany; and

(4) Suggest further examination both Sov and West partial measures could be most usefully pursued in ENDC. (To assuage possible German and French concern at discussion measures affecting them in forum where they not represented, SEC suggested desirability establishing inNAC Disarmament Steering Committee composed of 4 Geneva powers plus France and Germany and possibly smallerNATO Ally on rotating basis.)





Lord Home said British had hoped in upcoming talks we could take more positive attitude in order “maintain momentum” and that impression of progress could be reflected in communiqué.1 However, he prepared buy Secretaryʼs formula in view of obvious uneasiness on part our Allies, particularly Bonn. Home said he felt compelled raise non-dissemination issue since HMG publicly committed do so. Sovs would undoubtedly counter with insistence on assurances against spread to Germany via MLF, and, if so, Home promised vigorous support MLF concept as device for controlling spread despite known British lack of enthusiasm for idea. On Laos, Home, in his capacity as co-chairman, would press for more active Sov role and particularly for assurance more cooperative behavior on part of Polish member ICC although in view Khrushchevʼs statements in Harrimanʼs talks doubted if they would be forthcoming. Secretary urged Home to take particularly strong line with Soviets on Laos; he himself intended take vigorous issue with Soviet contention, conveyed to Harriman, that they considered their responsibilities in Laos at end.

In discussion possible communiqué following trilateral Tuesday talks it was agreed we should press for bland formulation stating three parties had engaged in useful probing exercise and each side now had clearer idea of othersʼ proposals, and now in better position to consult with Allies on further steps.

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL US-USSR. Secret; Priority. Rusk and British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs Home were in Moscow to sign the nuclear test ban treaty on August 5.

1 For text of the communiqué issued at the time of the signing of the test ban treaty, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pp. 992-993.





344. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, August 5, 1963, 10 p.m.

Secto 14. Secretary accompanied by entire US official party had one hour meeting with Khrushchev in latterʼs Kremlin office at 11 a.m. August 5. Following memcon is uncleared and subject to revision:

Khrushchev said wished greet Secretary and those accompanying him, who had arrived here to attend act of importance to all humanity. Believed signing of three environment TB Treaty was in effect fulfilling doctorʼs prescription so that health of people would not be affected. Consequently, if anyone objected to this treaty, such people should be subjected to psychiatric examination, for they were harming their own health.

Secretary expressed gratitude for reception US group had received and particularly for Khrushchevʼs willingness change his vacation plans in order receive US group and attend signing of treaty. Conveyed warm regards from President, noting President greatly encouraged by what was going to take place this pm. Expressed view all world welcomed three environment TB Treaty. Noted that if everyone who wished to come here from US for this occasion had really come, Khrushchev would believe Sovs had been invaded. We had had numerous requests from people wanting to come. Secretary then observed many in US group were inUSSR for first time; everyone was greatly pleased with and thankful for warm hospitality they were accorded. Secretary then said he was looking forward to discussions with representatives of Sov Govt during his stay inUSSR.

Khrushchev thanked for Secʼs kind words and for Presidentʼs good wishes. He was also grateful to President for his correct evaluation of historic act taking place this afternoon. While he did not wish overestimate significance TB Treaty per se—it was only small beginning—it laid foundation for further steps in right direction. One could not undertake a major project in one full swoop, but rather had to proceed in steps. In this connection, one could imply analogy of procedures used in felling big oak tree; could not fell a big tree by simply axing it down but had to make appropriate cuts in appropriate sequence and with appropriate instruments. Problems two sides were to resolve were extremely difficult, particularly taking into account fact that systems of two sides were different and antagonistic and that in dialogue between two sides many expressions of animosity were used. Therefore both sides have to act like a mother teaching her child to walk; if she pushed child, he would fall, but what mothers usually do is hold their child by hand and teach him how to walk before child can learn how to run.

Khrushchev said although TB Treaty a small step, it constituted an act of historic significance and expressed hope further steps would follow. He said Sovs appreciated greatly efforts by President, Secretary, and all other US citizens who supported this kind of endeavor. As for USSR, it had been and was making efforts at solving other problems by peaceful means, because they believe war could not resolve those problems. What must be done was develop trade, economic ties, and cultural relations, for such things brought joy to man; as to arms race, it should be stopped since it could lead only to catastrophe. Khrushchev then again welcomed Secretary and entire US group.

Secretary responded by thanking Khrushchev for his welcome and then noted Khrushchev quite right in saying our two systems were different. Recalled Khrushchev had said that neither Sovs could persuade US nor could US persuade USSR.

Khrushchev interjected this was quite true and commented that even in their graves two sides would adhere to their different positions, although then they would be of no danger to each other.

Secretary continued he believed however there were important areas of common interest to two sides, e.g., in insuring peace, something Khrushchev had spoken so eloquently in connection with TB Treaty. Secretary then expressed view both sides had unfinished tasks at home. US had such problems as building more schools, creating more universities, and education more teachers; also there were great urban centers in US which had been built 75 or 100 years ago and which required redevelopment or rebuilding, particularly because of population growth. Thus US had great deal to do for its people, and he knew Khrushchev had also interests in welfare of his own people. Secretary believed two sides could sit down to sort out their problems and see how they could move towards peaceful world, be it in small or large steps. He felt both governments were obligated to their peoples do so, and as far as US was concerned it was prepared do its share.

Khrushchev said Sovs also believed it more useful engage in productive efforts, which brought joy to the living, rather than in preparing graves for the living. Latter was also activity in which Sovs were now engaged, but this was because of necessity and Sovs were doing everything possible to halt arms race ASAP. He believed two sides must not stop at what they have achieved. Sovs had listed matters they believed could be resolved next, and there was no need to repeat that list. He had spoken about this publicly and to Harriman, and he was certain Harriman had informed in detail both Secretary and President.

However, Khrushchev continued, Sovs believed basic problem was German problem. So long as German problem remained unresolved, two sides would be like hedgehogs sticking their needles into each other. German problem was such as made each side wish have it resolved in its own way. He could understand very well that if US could resolve German problem in its own way, i.e., by liquidating social system inGDR and establishing united capitalist Germany that would be great victory for President, Congress, and those who supported capitalism. Likewise, if FRG were made part of socialist camp that would be tremendous victory for communism. But all this was sheer fantasy, for it could not be achieved without war. He wondered therefore whether time had not come when we, mature people who knew life and had seen war, should try move things from rails of war to rails of peace, namely, record situation as it existed now and forget about Adenauer and other people opposing such course. It was not only US who had such allies, for God had not forgotten USSR either and had given it allies who did not understand its policy. He believed however all such allies would eventually realize they had been wrong and unrealistic.

Secretary said US recognized German problem was fundamental and most important to future of our two countries and of our associates. He said he was prepared discuss this matter with representatives of Soviet Government during his stay here in order to see whether some understanding possible. We on our side recognize that in view past history what happened in Germany was of great importance to USSR. Likewise, again for historical reasons, we too were interested greatly in having peace in Central Europe. US recognized this very well as it had also been involved in two World Wars. Secretary then observed two sides perhaps differed in their respective interpretations as to what was happening in that area now. For our part, we believed German people were prepared put past behind them and become part of peaceful community of nations. We also believed we must not make situation such as would deprive German people of opportunity pursue this course or create danger of war. He reiterated he prepared discuss these matters while here. Referring to Khrushchevʼs hedgehog simile, Secretary said he not sure who were those hedgehogs; however he had impression that during past few years relaxation had occurred in Central Europe. FRGʼs increased relations with countries to east in such fields as trade, commerce, and exchange of persons had, in his view, reduced tensions.

Khrushchev interjected Secretary had mentioned “countries to east” and apparently did not wish use term “socialist”, but Sovs would teach us to use this term and, after all, time was best teacher.

Secretary continued he had been encouraged by this trend over past few years and believed possibility for peaceful settlement had now improved as compared to possibility existing two or three years ago.

Khrushchev agreed.

Secretary then said that as to use of term “socialist”, he had visited Belgrade recently1 and on basis that visit had gained impression there was less involvement by government in economy in Yugoslavia than was in US. He also noted Khrushchev had been using term “incentive”, which was capitalist term.

Khrushchev said Sovs knew this and indeed had argued some Communists about relationship between incentive factor and moral factor.

Sovs believed period of transition between capitalism and communism must include both capitalist factors, such as incentive, and moral factors, the two overlapping each other. Sovs believed capitalist phenomena in history was a positive one, as it was better than feudalism; however, Sovs believed communism was highest form of human society. In fact, capitalism had given birth to communism for if there had been no capitalism there would have been no Marx and all we would have today in such case would be legends about Christ and other utopian theories. What Sovs wished was to see efforts of two sides directed at competition in economic and cultural fields; they liked such competition much better than competition in rockets and nuclear weapons.

Secretary recalled Seaborg, Udall, Freeman had visited USSR in recent months and believed there were a number of points, some of them small, where greater cooperation between our two countries should be possible. Khrushchev himself had been soldier, therefore knew that when there was advance on broad front obstacle arising at one particular sector of front should not stop advance on rest of front. Thus we should move forward in such fields as nuclear energy research, space medicine, education, and other fields where US could benefit from USSR and USSR could benefit from US. He hoped he could explore possibilities of cooperation in details quite apart from more difficult problems before our two countries, although of course he was prepared to discuss more difficult questions as well.

Secretary then said he knew Khrushchev had another appointment very shortly and suggested that since he was not permitted speak on behalf of Senate, Senator Fulbright might wish to make a few remarks.

Fulbright said wished first recall pleasant meeting Foreign Relations Committee had had with Khrushchev four years ago, during latterʼs visit to US. That had been very interesting meeting and committee had benefited from it greatly. Fulbright then said he was very much interested in Khrushchevʼs exchange views with Secretary. It seemed to him that differences Khrushchev had been talking about could perhaps be compared to differences existing between North and South some 100 years ago. He himself was from South but he felt differences of past had virtually disappeared and Yankees now looked quite all right to him. Believed many differences between two sides were exaggerated. After all, both our countries wished improve life of their people, and he was impressed with what was being done in this respect inUSSR. As to US, we had mixed system and we did many things as Sovs did. Indeed, while Khrushchev was sometimes accused of promoting capitalism in his country, US Government was frequently accused of being socialist. Thus he believed things our two countries try to do were not different; differences lay in methods and means, because we believe our methods were more effective than Soviet methods, and vice versa. Indeed these differences appeared to him to be more in our minds than in our actions. Fulbright then recalled that during Khrushchevʼs visit to Foreign Relations Committee, Senator Russell had observed Khrushchev would make good US politician and Khrushchev had replied USSR would not have stupid man as its Premier.

Khrushchev remembered this exchange, but noted our two countries different and indeed opposite political and philosophical views. Nevertheless, he agreed that two countries had same ultimate goal, namely, development of their resources for benefit of their people. However, in pursuing that goal US was applying capitalist principle of private property, whereas Sovs were applying principle of common socialist property. While objective was same, Soviet approach was more noble for Sovs were acting on broad popular basis while US was acting on individualistic basis; US believed in principle of each for himself, while Sovs believed in principle of everyone for all. In any event, he did not think it would be possible sign agreed document on this matter now. He noted however Sovs could learn a lot from US and indeed had borrowed a lot from US experience. Lenin and Stalin had also recognized that there were many interesting things in US whichUSSR could borrow. However, USSR had been a student worthy of his teacher as it had surpassed US in certain fields. At time of Udallʼs visit here, latter had noted US had taught USSR how to build hydroelectric power stations, but now could learn something from theUSSR.

Khrushchev then said Sovs now wished bring about radical solution of their agricultural problem, and hoped to do so within seven or eight years. When Garst was here2 he had said that in order to have chemical fertilizers it was necessary to invest a great deal of capital. But now USSR had money available for this purpose and intended allocate billions of rubles to development of chemical industry producing such things as fertilizers, plastics, etc. Khrushchev then showed sample of polyethylene, saying it had been produced at a plant Sovs had brought from Krupp. He said some people in US believe that by imposing arms race onUSSR they would prevent it from catching up with US. However this was totally erroneous, and he could give his word that USSR would catch up with US.

In closing, Khrushchev observed he leaving for Black Sea tomorrow and would be happy if Secretary could come there too and take a dip in sea with him. He recalled he had swum there with McCloy, Udall and others, and he hoped Secretary would also immerse himself in that baptismal font.

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, ORG 7 S. Confidential; Priority.

1 Regarding Ruskʼs visit to Belgrade May 4-5, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XVI, pp. 350-353.

2 See footnote 2, Document 44, and footnote 7, Document 341.





345. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, August 9, 1963, 10 p.m.

Secto 51. Following is (uncleared) summary account of Secretaryʼs conversation with Gromyko en route Moscow to Gagra August 8, in presence Ambs Thompson and Kohler and Soviet Amb Dobrynin.

Exchanges.

Pursuing general talk at lunch, Sec suggested extension of present cooperation in outer space, peaceful use atoms and agriculture as fields worth exploring. Cited as specific examples of possibilities: (1) joint effort on super-accelerator on order 500 billion volts which might cost $400 to 500 million. In reply Gromykoʼs questions, said effort might be initially Soviet-American to be joined in later by others interested and US had no fixed ideas as to location. Seaborg was interested in this possibility and Soviet scientist Wechsler1 has been working in field. (2) Space medicine. (3) Exchange of information and plant materials and establishment joint projects on flights affecting basic food production. This was field in which US and USSR are allies against nature and cooperation might be on lines similar to projects on human viruses worked out under WHO.

Gromyko expressed interest and undertook discuss with appropriate Soviet officials. Agreed subject could be further developed as appropriate through diplomatic channels and upcoming exchange negotiations, as well as visit to US of Soviet Atomic Energy Chairman Petrosyants.

Consular Convention.

When Sec paused, Gromyko affirmed continuing Soviet interest and acknowledged next move up to them. Said several points in US reaction to Soviet draft not satisfactory but was assured these discussable.

Civil Air Agreement.

Gromyko then raised matter Civil Air Agreement, stressing already agreed and initialed and ready for signing, which he suggested should be done by Secy and himself when he comes toUNGA session next month. Secy cited PanAm operational problems, requiring advance notice to enable reallocate aircraft and PanAm reluctance to start service during unprofitable winter months. Agreed to consider Gromyko suggestion on return Washington; perhaps signing would be in fall but service begin next spring. Pointed out, however, immediate US priority is ratification Test Ban Treaty, which we wanted nothing else to interfere with.

New Embassy Buildings.

Gromyko complained about difficulties encountered with Embassy project in Washington. After Secy cited Executive Branch efforts, Dobrynin expressed apprehension about recent Senate bill and asked whether this might be defeated or pigeon-holed in house. Secy said Dept would look into question of how bill might be handled in House. Added he had discussed subject with Senators on his delegation, who had not intended bill apply Soviet plans and would be willing amend to exclude Soviet project, if necessary because of delays due present court action. Reaffirmed US interest in helping because our own plans to build in Moscow.

Signing Test Ban Treaty.

Gromyko raised US refusal accept Mongolian signature on TB Treaty. Soviets did not understand this and might have to review our position. Secy responded we had thought countries would sign with depositaries they recognize, whether this be one, two or all three. Gromyko said this not their understanding of talks with Harriman and Hailsham and they had thought no such cases would arise. With single exception Taipeh, Soviets prepared accept any signature, for example, Spain, Latin American countries, Portugal, Ireland. USSR did not accept such limitations as US seemed to want to impose. Would be wrong for US turn down North Korea, North Viet Nam. Recognition was not involved. After some further discussion, during which Gromyko said he didnʼt know if Hanoi intended sign, Secy undertook to look into question further with legal experts, but pointed out might have some problems on this with Senate.

Trade.

Gromyko turned to trade. Secy said we had given this some thought and he would suggest we have talks on subject in some detail. Matter was complicated, some aspects being executive, others legislative. Leaving aside effect of political atmosphere, there were other problems. First of all, US and USSR were not naturally complementary economically, so seemed doubtful any really large possibilities for development. Another hampering factor was Soviet trading practices, notably as re patents and copyrights. After some discussion, with citation examples, Soviet publication American works without permission or payment, Gromyko said this was small problem. Another aspect, Secy said, is Soviet practice buying only proto-types. He had recently reviewed long list showing great variety items of which one or two samples exported. Would rather sell USSR thousand tractors than just one. Dobrynin cited recent Khrushchev offer buy several whole factories in US. Secy then referred to lend-lease saying impasse on last attempt at settlement resulted from Soviet insistence linking with trade. If we get into trade discussions perhaps this impasse could now be overcome. Amb Thompson brought up in this connection Soviet absence from NY Worldʼs Fair. In response Dobrynin comment too late to consider, Mr. Mosesʼ2 messages to Secy and Amb Stevenson were cited as to possibilities of timely construction if Soviet decision on participation promptly reversed. Gromyko was noncommittal, but left negative impression.

Embassy Communications.

Secy brought up Embassyʼs need for leased line to Western Europe, citing delay in communications during Harriman/Hailsham talks. Referring to Soviet Government leased lines from New York, he expressed hope for reciprocity in this question. In response Secyʼs inquiry whether this was policy question, Gromyko replied not policy but rather technical involving other government agencies. Some discussion ensued during which Kohler cited details on recent delays in telegram traffic and expressed surprise technical problems involved since such lines previously provided to press agencies and facilities understood to be available. Gromyko indicated he would look into status of matter but gave no commitment. Secy then asked whether SovGov interested in establishing direct radio link from new Embassy. No direct reply was given but Dobrynin inquired whether arrangements actually made with any other governments under new US legislation. Secy replied a number were under discussion; he would provide Dobrynin with full information on return Washington.

Germany/Berlin.

Gromyko then raised German problems in familiar terms. Secy said he could not understand what objection Soviets have to our troops in Berlin. Gromyko replied objection certainly not military. However, this was remnant of World War II which should be eliminated. Social system of West Berlin, in which we interested, would be guaranteed. Secy said we regarded US presence in West Berlin as a stabilizing factor. This avoided a direct German confrontation, which would be precarious. Gromyko replied US presence not stabilizing but irritating factor. Conversation terminated at this point as plane came in for landing.

Comment: Summary and full report of talk with Khrushchev will follow. Secretary will comment direct to President at earliest possible moment.

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, ORG 7 S. Secret; Operational Immediate; Eyes Only.

1 Vladimir I. Wechsler, atomic physicist and member of the Soviet Academy of Sciences.

2 Robert Moses, President of the New York Worldʼs Fair Corporation.





346. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Pitsunda, August 9, 1963, 10:15 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

US: The Secretary

Ambassador Kohler

Ambassador Thompson

Mr. Richard Davis, EUR

Mr. Akalovsky, ACDA/IR





USSR: Mr. Khrushchev

Foreign Minister Gromyko

Ambassador Dobrynin

Mr. Vinogradov





SUBJECT

Part III—Trade1



US/MC/6

After some discussion of the German problem, Khrushchev suggested that it be put aside and that a more innocent subject be taken up. He said he wished to discuss US/USSR trade.

Khrushchev asked whether US capitalists wanted to get big orders for chemical equipment. US industrialists should be given opportunity to resolve this problem; theUSSR would reach agreement with them, and they wanted agreement, but Congressional laws interfered.

The Secretary said he had received reports from Under Secretary Harriman and Secretary Freeman about their conversations on the subject with Mr. Khrushchev. Also, he had discussed this matter with the President before leaving for Moscow. He had had an informal and rather incomplete discussion of the problem with Mr. Gromyko while flying down here.2 There were two types of problems concerning trade. Some could be resolved without Congressional action, while others required such action. As far as chemical plants were concerned, he did not believe this matter required legislative action, but could rather be handled by the Executive Branch. The Secretary said he would look into this matter when he was back in Washington.

However, the Secretary continued, he wanted to make some general observations as regards trade. Mr. Khrushchev had said, and quite rightly, that trade meant peace and that those who traded wanted peace, whereas those who did not trade did not want peace. But if one looked at Soviet trade transactions with the West, one saw that it involved something like 5-1/2 billion dollars a year. As to the United States, we had very little trade with the Soviet Union, and he believed we must improve this situation. But given the considerable difficulties on other problems, such as, for example, West Berlin, the question arose among the American people whether trade really went together with peace, and people wonder whether considerable trade between the Soviet Union and Western Europe really went hand in hand with peace. As far as he personally was concerned, he believed that it was so, but he wished Mr. Khrushchevʼs comment on this. The Secretary reiterated that we regarded trade as part of good relations and we would be glad to see channels for trade between West and East develop, including with the United States.

Khrushchev said that trade was not a matter where one party was obliging the other. No tradesman traded to oblige the other fellow; he traded only when it was profitable to do so. On the other hand, prohibition of trade with this or that tradesman was a matter of policy, because a country having such laws was guided by unkind intentions. The Soviet Union was for free trade with all countries of the world; it would be good if the United States adopted the same approach and if it convinced in this respect Ambassador Kohler, who was taking a cold war position on this matter and was against US-USSR trade, as well as against trade between the West and the socialist countries in general.

Khrushchev went on that Soviet specialists were not exactly keen on placing orders for chemical plants in the United States, for they believed US-manufactured equipment was the most expensive and they preferred to place their orders in other countries where prices were more favorable. Thus the USSR could place very large orders in the US only if commercial credit were allowed and if prices were comparable to world market prices. This meant that the Soviet Union wanted trade with the United States, but not under any circumstances. If those provisos were not met, the Soviet Union would place its orders elsewhere or build the equipment itself.

The Secretary reiterated he would look into the matter of chemical plants upon his return to Washington. He observed in this connection that there might be legislative inhibitions with regard to credit.

Khrushchev interjected he was speaking not of government credit but rather of commercial credit; while he would welcome government credit he understood this was a difficult problem involving matters of policy. He also wished to observe that as far as commercial credit was concerned the Soviet Union had such credit available to it in quantities greater than it could use.

The Secretary continued that as far as Ambassador Kohler was concerned, the latter acted on instructions and he, the Secretary, had seen him receive many bruises in Congress while trying to liberalize trade with specialist countries. We had no deus ex machina here, this question was a matter of governmental policy in which the President had a great personal interest.

The Secretary said he wished to conclude the discussion of this subject by recalling the suggestion he had made to Mr. Gromyko, namely, that at some stage he and Ambassador Dobrynin could take up details of the problem in Washington and attempt to work out solutions advantageous to both countries.

Khrushchev said he welcomed this. However, he wished to emphasize—and he hoped the Secretary would understand this—that this matter should be handled on the basis of equality. He was not pleading or holding out his hand; he was an equal partner and he would buy only what he needed and only if the prices were comparable to world market prices.

The Secretary observed we called this Yankee trading. In other words, both sides bargained hard but both derived advantage from the transaction.

Khrushchev said the USSR had had good trade partners in United States such as Du Pont and other solid companies. Those companies were eager to have trade relations resumed if only the government did not stand in the way.

The Secretary acknowledged that some American companies had approached the US Government in recent weeks

Khrushchev concluded the discussion on trade by saying some US industrialists were displeased with US trade policy. They felt, and quite rightly so, that they were losing their markets to the UK, Japan, France, and other countries with which the Soviet Union had extensive trade relations.

The Secretary then raised the subject of Laos, the discussion of which is covered in part IV of this memorandum of conversation.



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series,USSR, Khrushchev Talks. Secret; Eyes Only. No drafting information appears on the source text, but it was approved in S on August 28. The meeting was held at Khrushchevʼs dacha.

1 For Part II on Germany and Berlin, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XV, pp. 563-570; for Part IV on Laos, see ibid., vol. XXIV, pp. 1043-1045. Part I on a NATO-Warsaw non-aggression pact is not printed. (US/MC/4; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR, Khrushchev/Rusk) A summary of the complete conversation was transmitted in Secto 53 from Moscow, August 9. (Department of State, Central Files, ORG 7 S)

2 See Document 345.





347. Memorandum Prepared by the Central Intelligence AgencySource


Washington, August 9, 1963.

OCI No. 2557/63

THE NEW PHASE OF SOVIET POLICY

1. After a long period of immobility and probable internal contention following on the Cuban missile crisis, the Soviets have now embarked on a new and active line of policy. As the Chinese Communists have pointed out with great relish, Khrushchev has executed a “180-degree about-face” in accepting a partial ban on nuclear testing.

2. As with any major turn, the present switch probably involves a number of considerations, all of which point in the Soviet mind to the desirability of a period of reduced tensions in East-West relations. The main factors probably are Soviet internal economic problems, the sharpening conflict with China, and the opportunities presented by current divisions within theNATO alliance.



Internal Problems

3. Present evidence suggests that an important reason for Khrushchevʼs acceptance of a limited test ban is the desire to ease the military burden on the Soviet economy so that more resources can be devoted to urgent civilian programs. He has made repeated attempts to press this course upon his colleagues for about four years. During this same period, the economic case for some moderation of military and space spending has steadily gained weight; the rate of growth of GNP has slowed down, investment increases have become smaller and smaller, agriculture has remained virtually stagnant, and manifestations of consumer discontent have increased. Military and space programs, with their heavy demands on first-quality resources and on the machinery and equipment industry, have been the most important single cause of these problems. Furthermore, Soviet increases in military and space expenditures have thus far tended to spur US military and space programs and thus to increase the prospective future burden for the USSR.

4. Nevertheless, last winter it appeared that the USSR might respond to the Cuban missile crisis with a reaffirmation and perhaps even a strengthening of the primacy of defense over other economic sectors. Khrushchev spoke of the need constantly to replace advanced weapons systems and warned that increases in consumption would have to be limited by defense needs. Beginning in the spring, however, Soviet officials began to make statements which suggested that important new economic decisions were being taken. By early June—before the Presidentʼs American University speech of the tenth1 and the receipt of the Chinese letter of the fourteenth2 —Khrushchev laid down guidelines for revising the 1964-65 economic plan.

5. These instructions and his subsequent elaborations point to a major shift of resources into the chemical industry, and specifically into those components—fertilizer and synthetics—which work for agriculture and the consumer. Present indications are that the USSR intends to invest on the order of 15 billion rubles in this effort during the next five to six years.

6. New investment in technically advanced industries, particularly the chemical industry, will require the same kinds of scarce resources as those needed by advanced military programs. The effort now projected is so large as to point strongly toward a decision not to increase military and space spending at the high rate of recent years. We cannot determine, however, how much the growth of military and space expenditures will be checked, or whether the Soviets contemplate actual reductions. Khrushchev may have decided, for example, to resume the cutting of conventional forces, to abstain from competing with the US in a manned lunar landing race, or to set force goals for advanced weapon programs lower than those previously contemplated. Such decisions would presumably hinge on an easing of cold war tensions which would reduce risks to a minimum and hopefully result also in a slowing down of Western military programs. And on the internal scene, Khrushchev wishes to be able to point to an improved international atmosphere in order to forestall objections that his shift of resources endangers Soviet security.



The Conflict With Peiping

7. Whatever his internal concerns, Khrushchev could not have decided for a test ban without assessing the consequences for the dispute with China. Since the Soviets knew that an all-out Chinese attack on a test-ban pact was inevitable, the decision to sign the agreement was at the same time a decision to force the issue with China and thereby to assert in the strongest terms their intention to determine Communist policy. Furthermore, a nuclear test ban is excellently suited to the polemics over nuclear war which the Soviets have chosen as their strongest ground. Thus the Soviets not only gain something they can represent as a tangible success for the general political line attacked by China, but they force the Chinese to appear truculent and irresponsible in the sight of those underdeveloped countries and foreign Communists which are the objects of Sino-Soviet rivalry.

8. Aside from these considerations, the Soviet agreement to a partial test ban is one more proof that Moscow assesses Sino-Soviet relations as entirely beyond repair unless and until Peiping makes a fundamental reversal of its course. This does not mean, however, that Khrushchev will acknowledge any common interest with the West against China, lest this be taken as a sign of weakness which would embolden the West to take a firmer stand against his demands in other fields.



Policy Toward the West

9. Apart from these concerns of domestic development and bloc rivalry, the Soviets are also moving to exploit the opportunities of the present moment in the Western camp. Divisions have been widening between France and the Anglo-Saxon powers, and Adenauerʼs imminent departure has opened new prospects in Germany. The agreement on nuclear testing is particularly appropriate as the initial move in a more active European diplomacy; not only does it engage the sensitive and unresolved issue of nuclear policy in the NATO alliance, but it also opens all the Western differences related to questions of European security.

10. This development in the Western alliance comes at a time when the Soviets are keenly aware, in the wake of the Cuban missile crisis, that a renewal of pressure tactics offers little promise for immediate gains and probably higher risks than ever before. On grounds of both prudence and opportunity, therefore, the tactics of detente, neglected since the Camp David period, probably seem indicated.

11. The primary objective of present Soviet tactics in Europe is, as always, Germany. Here the USSR wishes not only to stabilize the position of East Germany (and, by extension, of Eastern Europe) but to destabilize the situation in West Germany by persuading Bonn that its present allies have forsaken their commitment to uphold the goal of reunification. Thus nearly all the Soviet proposals for the “next” agreements after a test ban are designed to extract Western acceptance of the GDR.

12. The non-aggression pact clearly pursues this aim, as does the proposal for limits on foreign forces in East and West Germany. The offer of an exchange of military missions between Soviet and NATO forces in the two Germanies works in the same direction; these missions already exist, and the Soviet proposal is merely designed to put them on a new basis which will extinguish their connection with the postwar occupation agreements based on the concept of eventual reunification. The Soviets have not yet spelled out details of their suggestion for control posts to inhibit surprise attack, but when they do it is very likely that the two Germanies will be included in the scheme as another means of freezing the present division.

13. The more recognition the Soviets can obtain for this division, the more success they would expect in their campaign to draw West Germany away from its close connections to the West. The inducements of trade are to be the main incentive in this effort, and Soviet propagandists are now laboring to impart a magic to the word “Rapallo.” Khrushchev is probably encouraged by evidences of West German industryʼs desire for Eastern markets, by Bonnʼs moves to establish trade missions in Eastern Europe, and by the coming withdrawal of Adenauer. His constant complaints against the restrictive US attitude toward trade with the USSR reflect, we believe, not so much a desire for greater exchanges with the Americans but rather an effort to break down the network of Western restraints which reinforce Bonnʼs hitherto negative attitude.

14. An additional factor in Soviet calculations is nuclear proliferation, which to Moscow means primarily the danger of a West German atomic capability. It seems certain that the USSR does not expect the partial test ban, or even a comprehensive one, to deter either France or Communist China from becoming a nuclear power. But it probably does see the present agreement, and the hopes for detente which it is meant to generate, as raising further obstacles against the various ways by which the Germans might move toward a nuclear capability—an independent effort, cooperation with the French, or participation in a multilateral force.

15. Khrushchev must calculate that, even if he cannot make tangible advances toward these objectives, he can in the very process lay substantial strains on relations within NATO. Broadly speaking, he can continually pose to Germanyʼs allies an apparent choice between accommodating West Germanyʼs concerns at the expense of detente or sacrificing these concerns to the prospect of a permanent stabilization of Europe and a thawing of the cold war. In this way he expects, at a minimum, to fray US and UK patience with Germany and to generate new doubts in the Federal Republic.



Tactics in the Present Phase

16. For the present, then, Soviet policy seeks to sustain an atmosphere of relaxed tensions in East-West relations. In the process, the USSR will propose a variety of limited agreements, probably involving tactical variations on previous Soviet positions. But Khrushchev wishes to focus the negotiating process primarily on Europe, and even here he probably does not contemplate significant Soviet concessions to Western views.

17. At Geneva, he will probably concentrate on partial disarmament plans and declaratory agreements of the type which he has recently set forth, but he will also employ East-West forums to try to bring such issues as the non-aggression pact to fruition. We expect him at some point to make a direct overture to Adenauerʼs successor. Throughout, he will play upon the fears that Western refusal to grant concessions will endanger the mood of détente. And since his tactics depend greatly on precisely this mood, he will probably find an early occasion to propose a summit meeting, calculating that he could put the resulting Chinese outcry to use in his campaign to isolate Peiping.

18. It is too early, however, to predict with confidence whether the Soviets would be willing at some point to pay any important price to deepen and prolong the new phase which they have set in motion. The preceding analysis indicates no reduction of their aspirations in regard to Germany, but rather an intention to pursue them in a different way. They have recently restated their aims to consolidate the GDRʼs position in full equality with the Federal Republic and to terminate the special Western position in Berlin in favor of a neutralized city. If asked to make concessions, such as new guarantees for Berlin, in order to sustain detente, we think that they would probably refuse.

19. If the German question proves as intractable as ever, the Soviets could terminate the present phase; indeed, Ulbricht has recently taken pains to remind the West of its vulnerability to harassments in Berlin and on the access routes. We think it more likely, however, that the Soviets will maneuver to avoid a clear-cut early stalemate. Balked in one field, they would probably seek some other area of discussion to sustain the atmosphere of relaxation. They might, for example, move to develop some new perspective in the disarmament field, perhaps by conveying a readiness to take up De Gaulleʼs proposal to be host for a new conference. In this connection, it is worth noting that China has reacted to the nuclear test-ban agreement by taking over the Soviet position as an exponent of radical disarmament, a development which may help to keep Soviet disarmament policy focused on limited measures.

20. Our view that the Soviets intend to sustain a period of relaxed tensions even in the absence of tangible agreements rests to a great extent upon our belief that Khrushchev has been required by the exigencies of his present situation to create a more amiable relationship with the West. To this extent, he is inhibited from reverting to high-risk policies or even to more menacing atmospherics. We believe that his economic policies and his decision to meet Peiping head-on give him a vested interest in perpetuating for some time the impression that a new era in East-West relations has begun. Some support for this view can be derived from Soviet treatment of the non-aggression pact; whereas Gromyko evidently worked hard to secure a commitment on this from the US and UK negotiators, subsequent Soviet propaganda has listed it as the most desirable next step but has not implied that detente would collapse without it. It would be characteristic of Khrushchev to enter upon a new phase of policy with great optimism but without any clear idea of how much tangible success was necessary to justify continuing the new line. It would also be characteristic of him to scale down his expectations only when repeatedly thwarted.



Some Contingencies

21. Western response to the ongoing détente campaign will therefore have an important bearing on how far Khrushchev is prepared to go. Though he is advancing old proposals, there will be a special incentive in the West to review them again because of the prospects opened up by the Sino-Soviet rift and the Soviet acceptance, without a concurrent and tangible quid pro quo, of Western terms for a partial test ban. On the other hand, Franco-German suspicions of Soviet intentions are already evident and are likely to be aggravated as Khrushchev presses proposals related to the division of Germany. If, at a later date, Khrushchev judges that his détente tactics have brought about a significant weakening of Western cohesion, but no actual concessions, he might think that some renewal of Berlin pressures would help him to cash in.

22. Outside the framework of European relations, there are two situations which could intrude on Khrushchevʼs calculations: Cuba and China. The more conciliatory line toward the US brings general Soviet policy into line with Khrushchevʼs efforts to damp down the Cuban situation in order to consolidate Castroʼs position. Agreement on this tactic was evidently one result of the Castro-Khrushchev discussions. But Castro is a third party to any East-West understanding, and he is capable of affecting it by his own independent actions. His 26 July speech, for example, constitutes a reservation of sorts on the extension of any Soviet-US negotiations to Cuba and Latin America, and in general the intensity of US-Cuban antagonisms makes unlikely any substantial and prolonged easing of tensions. Similarly, Khrushchev must fear that the US, even if it cooperates in cultivating a general debate, will exclude Cuba from this sphere and perhaps take some new vigorous action against it. If Cuba and the US become involved in rising tensions and new clashes, Khrushchev will be under great pressure to support Castro at the expense of his détente tactics with the US.

23. The Chinese, of course, are violently opposed to the new turn in Soviet policy. In a number of ways—an aggressive move in Laos, for example, or a new attack on India—the Chinese could demonstrate the limits of any international understanding reached without their participation. It is possible that the Chinese would generate in the international Communist movement enough disillusionment with Soviet policy to force Khrushchev into demonstrations of militancy and revolutionary zeal which would undercut his present line. We think this unlikely, however, because Khrushchev appears to have taken a definite decision to contest these criticisms verbally without altering his own policies.

24. A further contingency relates to internal Soviet politics. In our view, Soviet domestic and foreign policy have been more deeply intertwined in the months since Cuba than in any other period since Khrushchev attained power.

25. Events of the past six months suggest the existence of a conservative sentiment among some Soviet leaders who would have opted for a different line on economic questions and relations with the West or at least worked to oppose or dilute the line which Khrushchev is now espousing. Not only the allocation of resources, but questions of cultural policy, the extent of de-Stalinization, economic administration, and perhaps even relations with Yugoslavia appear to have been at issue in the presidium last winter. Khrushchev has told several Westerners that he had great difficulty in obtaining Kremlin agreement on his December offer of two or three on-site inspections for a comprehensive test ban, and implied that he had encountered reproaches when the US insisted on more. Since the incapacitation in April of Kozlov, who we suspect was a key figure among the conservatives, Soviet policy on all these issues has increasingly reflected Khrushchevʼs preferences. At any rate, in the aftermath of the Cuban crisis Khrushchevʼs policies seem to have been stymied, and this could have implications for the durability of the present phase of Soviet policy.

26. By this we do not mean that Khrushchev can be regarded as “soft” and his colleagues as “hard”; we continue to believe that Khrushchev probably was the main proponent of the Cuban missile deployment. What the evidence suggests is that Khrushchev has a more flexible outlook and a greater concern to keep Soviet policy in motion over a wide tactical range, while some (not all) of his colleagues incline more consistently toward internal discipline, heavy military spending, and a stance of greater hostility toward the West. If this is so, it means that some future development in the political leadership could undermine the current line of Soviet foreign policy, especially if it fails to deliver the benefits anticipated. In any case, following Khrushchevʼs departure there may be intense debate over these matters.





* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, USSR. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. A cover sheet and summary are not printed.

1 See Document 328.

2 For text of this letter, see The New York Times, July 5, 1963.





348. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, August 10, 1963, 2 p.m.

Secto 54. Eyes only for the President; no other distribution. Herewith my personal impressions of talk with Khrushchev and atmosphere my visit. There is no question but that Soviets went all out to handle my visit in a friendly and relaxed fashion. This was true not only of highest officials but of all levels including such a sourpuss as Zorin. Senators and other members our party given same treatment.

At the Black Sea Khrushchev was very much the affable grandfather. Although he said the usual things about Berlin there was no bluster or threat. One could not detect any sign of impending actions against the West but this could of course change overnight without notice. My chief impression of the talk with Khrushchev, with which Thompson and Kohler agree, was that other matters, possibly not fully known to us, are much more on his mind than are issues with the West. Both he and Gromyko referred to continuing the talks when Gromyko comes to the United Nations in September and expressed the hope that by that time an additional point or two of agreement could be found.

In a private talk with Gromyko I pressed him hard on Cuba and even on that subject he did not bristle. He said, “I want to tell you most seriously, and I am speaking officially, that the Soviet Union now has in Cuba only a limited number of military personnel engaged in training of Cubans. There is not in Cuba a Soviet military unit of any type, not even a platoon. Please inform the President of this.” When I pressed him further on Castroʼs activities in Latin America he said that Castro was merely engaging in public debate and that it is words not action. I told him we were concerned about Castroʼs activities; he feigned surprise and said he would be interested if I were to inform him of any such activities we have in mind. Neither he nor Khrushchev raised overflights or any other menaces which preceded earlier discussion of my visit to Moscow.

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, ORG 7 S. Top Secret; Operational Immediate. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Rusk. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2290)





349. Editorial Note


From 5:50 to 6:25 p.m. on August 15, 1963, Ambassador at Large Llewellyn Thompson met with President Kennedy in the Oval Office for a discussion of U.S.-Soviet relations. Thompson reported on talks with Chairman Khrushchev, Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko, and other Soviet officials during his visit to Moscow as a member of the U.S. delegation to the signing ceremony for the Limited Test Ban Treaty. The conversation ranged over many topics in addition to the treaty: the Sino-Soviet split, the Soviet economy, Laos, Berlin, the Bonn government, Cuba, Brazil, the non-aggression pact, the U.S.-Soviet air agreement, and Khrushchev himself. A tape recording of the conversation is in the Kennedy Library, Presidentʼs Office Files, Presidential Recordings, Tape 106/A41.

“One of the things he [Khrushchev] hit hardest was trade,” Thompson reported, and “he made clear he wanted [commercial] credits.” Asked by Kennedy, “if they have all this legendary store of gold, what advantage are the credits to them?” Thompson replied “we think they have a real balance of payments problem—the whole bloc.” Thompson continued, “we donʼt know what their gold stocks are but we donʼt think they're all that big and they've been drawing down on them undoubtedly. And now you see the earlier credits they've had from our European allies are coming due as they begin to pay for this stuff. And they're trying to stretch out now in their talks with the Japanese and others to get longer credits than they've been getting. So I think they are hurting.”

Questioned by Kennedy about the civil air agreement with the Soviets, Thompson reported that Secretary of State Rusk, who headed the U.S. delegation to Moscow, told the Soviets that “one practical problem is that PanAm didnʼt want to start the service in the winter time, theyʼd lose money.” Rusk agreed to “look into” a proposal to “sign it in the fall and have it take effect in the spring.” During a brief discussion of the Sino-Soviet split, Thompson said “thereʼs no chance of their getting together, in my opinion, between the two countries. I think there is a chance that, as they both slip down this road they're going, they may want to avoid forcing these parties [Communist parties in other countries] to choose up and take sides.”

The President asked Thompson why he thought the Soviets accepted the Limited Test Ban Treaty. Thompson responded at some length, commenting, “I think this was in our mutual interests and they realized it.” However, “they were under the illusion they could get a general ban without inspection, and it took a long time. They were misled by some of [Arthur] Deanʼs talk, and probably didnʼt come to this as early as they would have if they hadnʼt thought they could get the other. And then of course we know about those craters where they apparently had some explosions. And it may be that that convinced their military they could get something useful out of underground without too much cost.” Thompson concluded, “I certainly donʼt think this indicates a great big turning to the West in a big way,” and “if we do go ahead now itʼs going to be small steps.” Later in the conversation, the President asked “what do you think of the chances of this treaty blowing up in our face in the next year or so?” Thompson replied “very slim.”

Asked whether he thought Kennedyʼs “going to Russia sometime” would be “worthwhile,” Thompson said, “yes, of course he raised that you know, Khrushchev, that you come over and sign an agreement.” But it “should be a meaningful agreement,” Thompson continued. “I think if you got an agreement on observation posts, this would be very important,” but the Soviets had made it pretty clear this would be “inspection without disarmament, you had to have some disarmament with it, and the things they propose are not acceptable to us.”

Concerning Berlin, Thompson remarked on the Sovietsʼ “mentioning what Gromyko called practical considerations on Berlin. There are about six of them—we ought to pay for every use of the autobahn, we ought to pay for use of the cables, and this business about misuse of air routes.” Thompson thought “their purpose in raising this was chiefly to push us on doing something about it.” On Cuba, Thompson noted that “thereʼs some talk that Khrushchev might go to Cuba.” That would be “helpful,” replied Kennedy sarcastically. The President commented that “they've got so many promising things ahead of them in Latin America, I would think they're pushing, I mean, they donʼt have to keep any troops in Cuba.”

Near the close of the conversation, Thompson offered some observations on Khrushchev: “I think there are two things about Khrushchev, the more and more I've watched him. The main thing about him is his interest in production and economics. This comes out in every way. When they talk about ideology, he keeps making them talk about ideologies in support of production. Thatʼs what itʼs for. And the other thing is the German thing. Heʼs really stuck with this.” Thompson continued, “almost every move he makes is related to one of these two things. Heʼs utterly convinced he can beat us [unintelligible] production,” and “he certainly doesnʼt want to put all his money down the drain for arms that he doesnʼt have any need for.” Thompson commented further that “every time he gets strong enough to do it he keeps coming back to this business—surface navies are no good anymore, mass armies are outmoded, itʼs all missiles now”; and “I think heʼll reduce his troops.”





350. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, August 26, 1963, 11 a.m.

SUBJECT

Possibility of further agreements between the Soviet Union and the United States



PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, USSR

The President

Ambassador Llewellyn E. Thompson, Department of State



The Soviet Ambassador handed the President a letter from Khrushchev.1 After reading it, the President said he agreed that the test ban was a useful first step.

Ambassador Dobrynin said that the debate over the Treaty in the Senate sounded as though it were more a step toward war than toward peace.

The President explained that there were, of course, some attacks on the Treaty and that it was necessary to show that it was not disadvantageous to us.

Ambassador Dobrynin said he had spent considerable time in the United States and understood the situation. He said that the Chairman hoped that we could proceed to find other areas of agreement, both with respect to bilateral questions as well as in the field of international affairs involving other countries. The Chairman thought it would be useful to continue the exchange of opinions on these questions.

The President expressed his agreement, although he pointed out it was probably better not to attempt to do anything until the Test Ban Treaty had been ratified, which he thought would be the middle of September. He pointed out that we understood Mr. Gromyko was coming to the United States and we would be glad to discuss matters with him. He mentioned problems in the field of surprise attack as one possible area of agreement. Another was the ban on weapons of mass destruction in outer space. There was also the Civil Aviation Agreement, and we were looking to see what could be done in the field of trade. He asked what other questions the Soviets might have in mind.

Dobrynin said there was, of course, the German question. He understood that talks on this problem might be continued during the General Assembly.

The President remarked that the Germans were not particularly happy with us just now and said he supposed we had more trouble with our allies than the Soviets did with theirs. He referred to the fact that Chancellor Adenauer would be leaving soon and that there would be a new German Government to deal with. Dobrynin said there was probably not much point in arguing about whose allies gave the most trouble, but he asked if we thought Adenauer was really going to leave.

The President said he probably would, but it appeared that he would continue to be active, and this might make matters difficult for Erhard. Then there were Strauss2 and Brentano, who appeared to be anxious to get back into the picture. Altogether, it was a mixed situation which made the problem more complicated. He asked Dobryninʼs view as to what could be done about Germany now.

Dobrynin said everyone seemed to agree that borders could not be changed by war, but the problem was how to fix this situation legally. The Soviets had thought that a peace treaty was the best way. No one knew what would happen in the next five or ten years. The Soviets had hoped that their proposal for a nonaggression pact would be accepted, and were surprised that some of the Western Powers appeared to be reluctant. He said no one would gain from such an agreement, but it would improve the atmosphere. He understood the point respecting implied recognition of the GDR, but said that the Soviets were prepared to take any form that was mutually acceptable to avoid the recognition problem. He inquired whether the President thought an agreement could be reached on this question.

The President pointed out that the French had declared themselves as opposed, and that the Germans did not appear too happy about it. He thought that any good will which his visit to Germany3 had built up had been expended by the problems that arose in connection with the Test Ban Treaty. He said, however, we had agreed to explore this question and would do so. He said we would be prepared to discuss it after the ratification of the Test Ban Treaty. He pointed out that in addition to France and Germany, Italy seemed somewhat concerned because they seemed to feel that a greater danger than the German question was the support the Soviet Union gave the Communist Party in Italy.

Dobrynin asked if it were really thought that such support had been increased recently.

The President did not reply directly, but said he was merely pointing out what some of our problems were. He thought it was to everyoneʼs interest that West Germany and the United States maintain their present ties. There were, of course, charges that Germany had a veto on United States policy, but this was not really true. When Gromyko came to the United States, we would be prepared to give an evaluation of where we stood on the nonaggression arrangement.

Dobrynin then said there was a question of observation posts, and the President mentioned weapons in outer space.

Dobrynin asked what about reduction of troops? He replied in the affirmative to the Presidentʼs question whether he had in mind a reduction by a certain percentage.

The President replied that we actually have a de facto situation in which the number of troops are at least stable. We werenʼt adding any, and he thought the British and Belgians might withdraw some. The troop numbers were at least as high as they were going to be. He pointed out that the pressures from such things as our balance-of-payments were in the direction of reduction and he assumed the same was true of the Soviets. We would have to consider whether or not this de facto freeze was not better than attempting to formalize it, which would bring in a number of complications, including inspection.

Dobrynin said he understood this point, but had hoped that the question of observation posts and perhaps military missions might have been combined with troop reduction. The military missions could do something to verify withdrawals.

The President said we would like to reduce the numbers of our troops and would look into it, but said we have to work with the Europeans, and he indicated that formalizing an agreement on this subject might bring more complexities than progress. With reference to our Allies, the President pointed out that the Soviets were not Anglo-Saxons.

Dobrynin said that when Harriman was in Moscow, he had mentioned an exchange of letters between the President and General De Gaulle. He asked whether the President thought the French would continue tests.

The President replied that he thought that for the next year or so the French would only test underground. He said he had written to General De Gaulle to see if there was some way he could assist him in being able to subscribe to the Test Ban. The General had replied that he thought any assistance we could give would only be under limitations that were unacceptable to him. The President expressed the opinion he did not think General De Gaulle wanted assistance. He then asked Dobrynin what China would do about testing.

Dobrynin said he did not know, but that the Soviets were not worried. He said how many bombs could the Chinese acquire?

The President pointed out that they would not need many, and thought their position would be somewhat like that of the French.

Dobrynin admitted that the Chinese felt entitled to have some bombs of their own, but that this would not affect the balance of power. He thought that when they had acquired some bombs and saw the effects of them, they would be more cautious.

The President observed that the Soviets appeared to be worried about the Germans five or ten years from now and said that we had to think about the Chinese over a similar period of time.

Dobrynin said the Soviets were not worried about the Germans as such, but the possibilities they had of involving the United States and the USSR in conflict.

The President said we were not prepared to let the Germans carry us into an adventure which we would have to finish, but he again made the comparison with the situation with respect to China.

Dobrynin said the Soviets did not think the Chinese wanted war, and hoped that they understood what modern war was. When the President asked why the Soviets were more worried about Germany than China, Dobrynin inquired where the Chinese might cause trouble. When the President mentioned Laos, Dobrynin observed that he had been speaking of war, and said that Laos was in a different category.

When the President said that suppose things got worse in Laos and that SEATO felt compelled to secure the Mekong River and then the Chinese felt that Western troops were too close to their boundary and took some action and in reply the SEATO powers moved against the infrastructure, this could build up into something quite serious. With respect to Germany, he thought the most likely danger would be some internal uprising in East Germany.

Dobrynin pointed out that we already have small incidents which could develop into more serious ones. He pointed out how the confrontation between Soviet and American tanks in Berlin had built up. He said that he was at a meeting of the leadership in Moscow when the dangers in this situation were brought to Khrushchevʼs attention. Khrushchev had ordered the Soviet tanks to withdraw for some distance, and said he was sure that the Americans would follow suit. This is what, in fact, did happen. He said that Bonn thought that they could reunite Germany, but that this was now impossible because of the different social systems that had been established in the two parts of Germany.

The President said that the situation does not seem too bad. Of course, Erhard would probably have to try to prove that he was as strong as Adenauer.

Dobrynin thought that it would be useful for the borders to be recognized.

The President observed that West Germany had declared it would not use force to change existing borders, and thought that this was about as good as we could do right now. Dobrynin expressed the opinion that we should take some further step.

The President then returned to the subject of Laos. He sometimes wished that none of us had gotten in there. We wanted to keep Souvanna Phouma in power rather than have either Phoumi or the Pathet Lao take over. He inquired whether the Soviets could not do something about this.

Dobrynin said the Soviet position was well known. The Geneva Agreement had set up Souvanna Phouma and a coalition government had been established. The Soviets did not want to interfere, and they had no troops there and did not intend to send any. In these circumstances, what could they do?

The President pointed out that they had influence in various places. He pointed out that the Polish member of the ICC had not been very helpful in getting the ICC to function usefully.

Dobrynin said that we seem to misunderstand their relationship with their allies, and that they did not advise the Pole what to do. The President said that doubtless the Pole was doing what he thought the Soviets wanted him to do.

Dobrynin then pointed out that apparently we had a somewhat different appraisal of what was actually happening on the spot in Laos. The President said he was supporting Souvanna Phouma and he was somewhat concerned that Souvanna might give up and go to Paris. This seemed to be where most of the political figures from this part of the world ended up. In this event, we would then have no central buffer between the two extremes.

The President then referred to Cuba, and said that apparently the Soviets had withdrawn many of their troops, but we did not know how many were there now.

Dobrynin said that Khrushchev had recently stated that all combat units had been withdrawn from Cuba. The President asked what would happen over the next six months with the Soviets. Would the Soviets withdraw more or would the number remain the same?

Dobrynin said that he had no instructions to say anything on this point, but his strong impression was that when the Soviet instructors there had finished their jobs, they would leave.

The President said we had had reports that Mr. Khrushchev might go to Cuba, and asked if Dobrynin had any information on this.

Dobrynin said it was Khrushchevʼs intention to go to Cuba toward the end of the year, but that no exact date had been set. He inquired whether the President intended to go to the United Nations General Assembly and make a speech there.

The President said that he was considering the matter, but his inclination was not to go. If he went, it would be only for a day. The President said if there were any change in his plan, he would let the Ambassador know.

Dobrynin said that Khrushchev definitely did not plan to go to the opening of the United Nations General Assembly, although there had been some thought that he might appear in connection with his trip to Cuba.

The President said he was sure Mr. Khrushchev was aware of the sensitivities involved in his visiting Cuba. This was Mr. Khrushchevʼs affair, but he wanted him to know of these sensitivities.

Dobrynin said he thought the Chairman was aware of the situation but he would inform him of the Presidentʼs remarks. The President said that if Mr. Gromyko came to Washington in connection with his visit to the General Assembly, he would be glad to see him.

Dobrynin then raised the subject of trade, which the President had mentioned, and said that while he had not been instructed to take it up with the President, he could mention one recent development. The Soviets had sold about two million dollars worth of textiles to United States firms, but this sale was now blocked, he assumed by the Treasury, on the grounds that the United States was not sure whether these textiles were Chinese or not. He thought this was a strange situation.

The President said that perhaps Ambassador Thompson could look into this matter.

Dobrynin then reverted to the question of the Civil Air Agreement.

The President said this was a question of finding the right time.

Dobrynin said that perhaps it could be signed to take effect at a later date. When the President mentioned that the Soviets had a considerable amount of gold and that perhaps they could send us some, Dobrynin said that the Soviet proposals on troops reduction and freezing military budgets could help us in this respect.

The President then raised the question of activities in outer space, pointing out that these are very expensive. If outer space was not to be used for military purposes, then it became largely a question of scientific prestige, and even this was not very important, as accomplishments in this field were usually only three-day wonders. If each of us continued on a crash program as the United States was doing now, it would cost a great deal of money. He wondered whether there could be any understanding about what our schedules in this field were.

Dobrynin said he thought this was something that might be worked out. When the President referred to possible cooperative projects, including going to the moon, Dobrynin said that this was an interesting thought, and he would inform the Chairman. He knew from some remarks that Khrushchev had recently made that he felt that we should have more cooperation in outer space.

The President said that if each knew the otherʼs ambitions and plans, it might be easier to avoid all-out competition. If Mr. Khrushchev thought that a cooperative effort was possible, he would be interested.

The interview ended with an agreement on what would be said to the press about the meeting.4



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series,USSR, Dobrynin Talks. Secret. Drafted by Thompson. According to another copy the memorandum was approved in the White House on August 27 and inS/AL on August 29. (Department of State, Central Files, POL US-USSR) The time of the meeting is from the Presidentʼs Appointment Book. ( Kennedy Library)

1 For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. VI, pp. 304-305.

2 Franz Josef Strauss, former West German Minister of Defense.

3 For documentation on the Presidentʼs visit to Germany and Berlin, June 24-26, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XV, pp. 525 ff.

4 On August 23 Dobrynin had asked Thompson to lunch and developed these same points. A 5-page memorandum of their conversation is in Department of State, Central Files, POL US-USSR.





351. Memorandum for the FilesSource


Washington, August 26, 1963, 5:20 p.m.

The President called me [Thompson] to ask my view as to the purpose of the Dobrynin visit.1 I said they appeared to be looking for an agreement on most anything. He asked if the purpose might be to cause us trouble with our Allies. I said that this was probably a factor but did not appear to be a major one since they appear to be backing away from the nonaggression pact as being an absolute requirement as the next step. It appeared to me they would be happy with an agreement on Civil Aviation and probably ban on weapons in outer space.

The President inquired whether we should inform the Germans, and I said I had already had a request from von Lilienfeld2 for an appointment, and he came in at 3:00 p.m. I gave him a brief run-down, saying there was nothing new, it had merely been a repetition of old positions.

The President asked whether we should give them a copy of the Khrushchev letter, and I suggested that this not be done.

The President called attention to the story in this eveningʼs Star which states that the President will meet with Gromyko when he arrives to attend the GA. I said this obviously must have come from Dobrynin, and the President thought perhaps I should fill in the Parea as to what really happened, that is that the President stated if Gromyko came to Washington, the President would be glad to see him.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL US-USSR. Secret. The source text bears no drafting information.

1 See Document 350.

2 Georg von Lilienfeld, West German Minister in the United States.





352. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in SwedenSource


Washington, September 3, 1963, 6:27 p.m.

490. Most literally eyes only for the Vice President from the Secretary.1 President and I have discussed possibility quick informal visit to Leningrad and have consulted Ambassador Thompson. Our judgment is that it would be inadvisable and would throw negative shadow over expected successful visits to Scandinavian countries. We estimate Soviets would react adversely to short visit by such high personage which could not include proper visit to Moscow, suitable hospitality, and talks with highest Soviet leaders. They would want such visit to be main event rather than appendage to others. Second reason is that we are now in sensitive period of relations with allies, especially Germans and French, who would react publicly with suspicion about such a visit in context our discussions about when and on what further exchanges with Soviets should take place.

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Chron. Top Secret; Priority. Drafted and approved by Rusk and cleared with Tyler.

1 Documentation on the Vice Presidentʼs trip to northern Europe, September 2-17, is ibid., Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2304-2309B and in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Trips and Conferences Series, Vice Presidential Trips.





353. Editorial Note


In a meeting with Ambassador at Large Thompson on September 10, 1963, Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin indicated that he had a personal message for President Kennedy from Chairman Khrushchev. Dobrynin stated that “the Soviet Government considered that things had recently taken a turn for the better in the international situation and in relations between the Soviet Union and the United States. With the signing of the Test Ban Treaty and the exchange of views with Secretary Rusk, there had developed a relaxation of tension and the prerequisite for the settlement of other questions had been established. This could lead to a real turning point, and the end of the cold war.” Dobrynin then noted “certain facts which did not fit in with the situation and these were the provocative actions against Cuba, which had increased in recent weeks. Unknown planes had shelled industrial establishments and there had been landings of saboteurs on the Cuban coast.” The United States had stated that it “had nothing to do with these actions, but no one could believe this.” If such attacks continued, it “could only lead to a new crisis.” The Soviet Union had “undertaken certain commitments in respect to the protection of the independence of Cuba” and “would certainly fulfill its commitments if aggression were unleashed against Cuba.” For text of the memorandum of conversation, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XI, pages 861-862.

On September 13 Thompson met again with Dobrynin and made an oral statement in which President Kennedy stated categorically that “not only was the United States not involved in any way in such attacks, but has been making every effort to prevent them,” in keeping with its policy concerning hit and run attacks by Cuban exile groups. The statement then cited evidence of “Cubaʼs deliberate stimulation and support of subversive activities throughout the Hemisphere” and concluded that it was “not the United States, but the behavior of the Castro regime that is to blame for the difficulties in the Caribbean area.” For text, see ibid., pages 866-867.





354. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, September 10, 1963, 7 p.m.

861. I called on Gromyko this morning to inform him of my departure tomorrow for Washington, to inquire as to his own travel plans, and to ascertain any ideas he might have on arrangements for continuation talks with ourselves and British. I also sought to draw Gromyko out on UN subjects bound to come up, such as outer space and expansion of Security Council and ECOSOC, as well as on bilateral and trilateral issues on which discussions already initiated when Secretary in Moscow.

In talk lasting more than hour Gromyko was affable, relaxed and quite positive in his expression of hopes of progress. He will depart Moscow early Sunday morning arriving NY about 6:30 p.m. local time. Although he had no specific suggestions on schedule of talks I gained impression he is anxious to begin discussions as soon as possible and carry them on so long as they offer some hope of progress. Date of return is open. In what impressed me as considered expression of official Soviet view, Gromyko as I left said that as result Test-Ban Treaty, situation offers real chance for progress and he hoped that we would take maximum advantage of opportunity. In his view, if forthcoming round of talks could produce good results, this would be good for the US, the USSR and generally for the world.

I began substantive discussion by bringing up UN subjects. I indicated that while we had hoped progress might be made in formulating outer space rules, we had been somewhat disappointed to note a recent article by Korovin (Embtel 812)1 which seemed to reflect a rejection of our suggested step-by-step approach. While only vaguely familiar with article Gromyko pointed out that Korovin does not occupy official govt position and therefore cannot express official Sov views. On other hand ideas expressed by Korovin, as leading Sov scientist, must be regarded as reasonable. The SovGovt view remains substantially same as before: i.e. any formulation of outer space rules must provide for prohibition of satellites for spying, propaganda or military purposes. Within this general framework, Sovs would not rule out step-by-step approach to the problem; in any case he preferred to leave this question to the judgment of experts who he understood were now discussing the problem in NY.

I then inquired if Gromyko had given any reconsideration to question of enlarging Security Council and ECOSOC in order to meet desires for representation by Afro-Asian bloc. Gromyko took the initial position that progress toward this end could be brought about only through revision of charter and that this was impossible so long as we insisted on retention of the “Chiang Kai-shekist clique” in Chinaʼs permanent seat. Pointing out that Sovs feel strongly that Chinese should be legally represented in the UN and that present arrangement in Sov view was unlawful, he saw little point in pursuing further a question which had long been at issue between us. Gromyko felt that a possible alternative solution to problem of increasing Afro-Asian representation might be redistribution of nonpermanent SC seats and possibly also ECOSOC slots but he wished to make clear that if this method should be adopted there could be no surrender of seats by “socialist countries.” I pointed out that others felt same way as Sovs about their established positions. I therefore failed to see how redistribution would meet the problem in view of the vastly increased size of the UN and urged that some other solution should be found to meet the legitimate aspirations of the Asians and Africans for representation.

Turning to subjects on which discussion had already been initiated, I inquired if Gromyko would be prepared in his ENDC co-chairman capacity to continue examination of such disarmament proposals as budget freeze, surprise attack and observation posts which already begun in Geneva. Gromyko replied that he would be prepared to discuss all questions which were on ENDC agenda, as well as those which had been discussed in Moscow during Secretaryʼs visit, especially NAP.

With regard to NAP, I said, as Gromyko aware, consultation with our allies had been initiated and they had raised precisely those questions which Secretary had foreseen, particularly need for linking NAP with situation of Berlin and access thereto. Gromyko commented that access was related to broader question of German Peace Treaty and if we should insist on relating it to NAP there would be little chance of progress. I reminded him that at Pitsunda Khrushchev had seemed to agree with Secretaryʼs view that NAP should be crowning move in series of separate steps toward the gradual elimination of tension. Gromyko acknowledged that Khrushchev had expressed such idea but that what he meant was that ideally all problems should be resolved first and then NAP concluded. This in the Sov view however was idealistic, not practical. Gromyko agreed that a more feasible approach was to proceed step by step but again stressed that linking access with NAP was out of question.

I referred to Presidentʼs recent conversation with Dobrynin2 and stressed we continued to be disturbed at way Soviet Union shirked its co-chairman responsibilities in Laos and adopted partisan attitude, most recent example of this being Sov decision to publicize Souphanouvong3 charges while continuing deny same privilege to Souvanna Phouma charges of last June, or to act on them. Gromyko said that on subject of Laos he could add little to what he and Khrushchev had already said to Harriman and Secretary; Soviet Union stands for a neutral, independent Laos but dispute between Princes was in Sov view an exclusively internal Laotian affair in which Sovs did not intend to interfere. Meanwhile, Gromyko wished to draw attention to serious incidents of last few days in Vientiane which according to Sov information were result of aggressive action by Phoumi forces against small PL contingent. I pointed out that while I was not informed in detail as to Vientiane situation there was established machinery for investigation of such incidents and charges and by agreement of co-chairmen this should be set in operation. It was not true as Gromyko had said that we always sided with Phoumi and denied right of Souphanouvong to be heard. In fact, we supported Souvanna Phouma as we had both agreed to do; unlike Sovs, we have not unilaterally aired Phoumiʼs side of story; we believed that when charges or accusations are leveled by any element in the Laotian body politic all should be objectively examined by the ICC on the basis of recommendations by the Geneva co-chairmen, especially those put forward by head of govt.

Again citing Presidentʼs conversation with Dobrynin I asked Gromyko if his govt had given consideration to Presidentʼs broad, imaginative proposal for joint cooperation in outer space projects and if he would be prepared to discuss this subject while in NY or Washington. Gromyko said Sovs agreed in principle with idea and he would of course be prepared to examine any specific proposals US might have in mind. On other bilateral issues Gromyko said he would be prepared to exchange views on trade question and civil aviation. He also agreed that further possibilities of cooperation in the atomic energy field could be explored by Petrosyants4 with Seaborg in the course of his Nov visit to US, and other measures to broaden exchanges could be dealt with in upcoming exchange negotiations in Moscow.

In concluding the conversation I said to Gromyko it would be helpful if I could take back with me some encouraging word with regard to Embʼs communications problem. Almost plaintively Gromyko said he would look into the matter again but at this point could promise nothing. Meanwhile he wished me to understand that no policy question was involved here, that only “technical difficulties” stood in way.

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 18-4. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

1 Telegram 812, September 6, summarized a letter to the editor of International Affairs by Yevgeni P. Korovin, Chairman of the Soviet Committee of Outer Space Legal Questions. (Ibid., SP 5 USSR)

2 See Document 350.

3 Prince Souphanouvong, Vice Premier of the Royal Laotian Government.

4 Andronik M. Petrosyants, Chairman of the Soviet State Committee on Atomic Energy.





355. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, September 17, 1963, 11:20 a.m.

SUBJECT

Soviet-American Relations and Negotiations



PARTICIPANTS

The President

Foy D. Kohler, American Ambassador to the Soviet Union



I met with the President for a bit over one-half hour.

After the initial greetings and picture-taking he referred to a letter he had received from Adenauer asking that reference to German reunification be included in his speech to the UNGA.1 He asked whether I thought this would create any problem. I replied that I had read a draft of the speech and found it very good. I thought that if a reference could be included in somewhat general terms related to self-determination, there would be no problem.

The President then asked for my views on the idea on cooperation in outer space he had put forward to Dobrynin during their recent conversation.2 I told him that I had discussed this with Gromyko who had considered the suggestion an “interesting” idea.3 However, I had the impression the Soviets were both intrigued and puzzled about just what the President might have had in mind. Consequently, while giving a cautious welcome to the idea, Gromyko had asked that we come up with some concrete suggestions as to what might be done in this field. The President said that, although this had not been an idea that he had considered in detail, he continued to be interested in developing it and thought it would in fact be useful, for example, and save a great deal of expense if we could come to some kind of agreement with theUSSR on the problem of sending a man to the moon. I reaffirmed that I thought there might be some real interest in developing cooperation in this field since Khrushchev had a problem of allocation of extremely limited resources which made the Presidentʼs problem relatively simple.

The President then asked my views as to what the Russians had in mind discussing during Gromykoʼs visit. I said that of course the Russian prime projects which Khrushchev [Gromyko?] would put forward were a non-aggression pact proposal and some version of the fixed control post idea. However, I thought they understood that we were entangled with our allies in both of these problems and would be unable to go very far during the upcoming talks. There were some measures in the disarmament/security field which might be discussed some with Gromyko. However, I did not see how we could get very far in substance with these partial measures here, though some agreement in principle might be reached to guide further discussions in Geneva. Consequently, the only field left in which I could see possibilities of something concrete emerging was that of bilateral interests. I personally hoped very much that we could go ahead now with the civil air agreement which was initialed a couple of years ago and in return get from the Russians a leased line to Western Europe for the improvement of the Embassyʼs communications. I mentioned that some people seemed to be thinking we could get much more, such as a Berlin settlement, in return for the civil air agreement but I did not think we could sell this horse a second time at such a price. I thought we would do well and that our interests would be served if we could get the civil air agreement, which I considered to be in our interest anyway, together with improvement in Embassy communications. The President appeared to me to indicate general agreement with these observations. I said that in addition to this I would hope that we could discuss two other questions of bilateral interest: a Consular Convention with the promise it held of opening up consular offices in the two countries, a process which would be to our advantage; and trade, a subject which was of great interest to the Soviets and which would presumably be of mutual benefit. There ensued considerable discussion, particularly of the trade aspect, during which I responded to the Presidentʼs question about the status of the Johnson Act;4 the possibility that this could be interpreted to permit three to five year credits for Soviet purchases of large-scale installations; the limited possibilities of a large development of trade in any event; and related matters. The President expressed his interest in moving as much as we could in the trade field. In this connection he referred to the Canadian and Australian sales of wheat to theUSSR, indicating some regret that we had not been able to do this ourselves, but agreeing that the disposition of Canadian and Australian surpluses would presumably open up some outlets for our own. The President also said he thought the handling of the subject of trade was too dispersed in the government and that he had dictated a memo suggesting that the question be put into the hands of a responsible official who could pull it together and ensure a more effective exploration of the possibilities in this field.5

In response to his inquiry about the handling of these further questions I told him that work was going forward in the Department preparing position papers and that the Secretary would presumably be discussing these matters with him before leaving for New York.

The President asked about the UK role in talks with the Soviets. This led to some discussion of the previous quadripartite meetings with the Soviets; of the difficulties occasioned by French non-participation; and of the field of mutual interest on a tripartite basis illustrated by the test ban treaty negotiations. I said, however, that while at least one tripartite meeting would be necessary, the Russians were clearly interested principally in talking on a bilateral basis with us. I said that if we could come out with a civil air agreement and improved Embassy communications together with some agreement in principle on consular and trade relations to be the subject of continuing negotiations, I thought this would serve the purpose of maintaining a forward movement. The President nodded agreement.

The President also inquired about relations between Moscow and Peiping. He asked whether in the event of the death of either Khrushchev or Mao or both the present conflict might be terminated and a close relationship restored. After saying that I was sure there could be no reconciliation during the existence of the present leadership, I said it was possible that there could be an ostensible reconciliation between the Russian and Chinese Communists. However, even in this case I thought it would be a temporary relationship. Fundamentally, I thought the cleavage rested on national factors. Specifically, from the Russian point of view, the Russians were simply not going to share the wealth with the Chinese as would be required on a basis of pure Communist theory; and the Russians were not going to permit the Chinese actions to involve them in a nuclear conflict with the U.S.

The President asked about Russian views of the multilateral force and non-dissemination. I told him that while the Russians were aware of the difficulties we were having with the MLF and thus not at present in a state of acute concern, they would never agree to any non-dissemination formula which would allow for and seem to give their blessing to MLF. Consequently, I could see no prospect of any agreement on this subject. The President expressed his agreement saying that he saw no reason why Moscow should agree from their point of view.

The President asked whether he would see me again. I told him that I hoped so and assumed that I might accompany the Secretary in discussions he might have with the President about the talks with Gromyko. He asked when he would see Gromyko and I told him nothing was fixed but that I assumed it would be somewhat later on. He also asked when I would be back in Moscow and I told him that my present plans were to return the first week in October.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL US-USSR. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Kohler, who was in Washington for consultations.

1 A copy of Adenauerʼs September 16 letter is ibid., Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. For text of the Presidentʼs address to the United Nations General Assembly, September 20, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 693-698.

2 See Document 350.

3 See Document 354.

4 Reference is to the Johnson Debt Default Act, signed April 13, 1934, which prohibited financial transactions with any foreign government in default of its obligations to the United States. (48 Stat. 574) It was amended on July 31, 1945, to exempt foreign governments that were members of both the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development from some of its provisions. (59 Stat. 516)

5 Not further identified.





356. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) to Secretary of State RuskSource


Washington, September 20, 1963.

SUBJECT

US/USSR Agreement on Exchange of Civil Air Transport Rights



As Chairman of the Interagency Committee on International Aviation Policy I convened a meeting of representatives of the member agencies on September 181 to consider the desirability of signing at this time the bilateral Air Transport Agreement that was negotiated in 1961. The general consensus of the meeting was that there were no insuperable difficulties to prevent consummation of the Agreement if this were considered advisable for political reasons. However, the USSR would acquire certain political advantages. The operation of the route would not be expected, at least in its initial stages, to prove profitable for the designated United States airline. Furthermore it was noted that the Russian airline would gain much more in route mileage than the designated United States airline, which already operates transatlantic schedules, and would additionally have the advantage of drawing traffic from points behind Moscow. Therefore it was felt that the USSR should make concessions for United States concurrence in the signing. Possible concessions suggested were approval of a leased teletype line to our Embassy in Moscow and conclusion of a consular convention.

The meeting also recognized that if an agreement were signed, our policies with regard to aviation relations between the United States and the Soviet Bloc states would have to be reviewed and our attitude toward third-country aviation relations with Soviet Bloc states would have to be re-considered. Our current efforts to obtain support for denial of Bloc airline rights in developing countries and further to prevent Bloc operations through these countries to third countries, e.g., Cuba, would be made more difficult.

The question of the time interval needed between the signing of the agreement and its going into operational effect was also brought up at the meeting. Mr. Halaby, the Federal Aviation Agency Administrator, pointed out that although the technical annex to the proposed agreement was still unsatisfactory, execution of some of its provisions could probably not be completed in less than six to nine months. It is understood that Pan American World Airways would likewise wish a commensurate time lag before initiating its service. Therefore some determination will have to be made on when the Agreement will become mutually effective for operational purposes. This is already provided for in the Agreement by a stipulation that the contracting parties will by a subsequent exchange of notes specify a date on which the agreed services may commence.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, AV 4 US-USSR. Secret. Drafted by Henry T. Snowden, Chief of the Aviation Division, and concurred in by Thompson and G. Griffith Johnson (E). A handwritten notation on the source text indicates that Rusk saw it.

1 A list of agency representation at this meeting is attached, but not printed.





357. Memorandum for Director of Central Intelligence McConeSource


Washington, September 25, 1963.

SUBJECT

CIA Characterization of the Soviet Space Program



1. This memorandum is in answer to your request for information.1

2. The Central Intelligence Agency has consistently characterized the Soviet space effort as a simple but aggressive one utilizing the launch vehicles and facilities which in essence constituted the early Soviet ICBM program. From this base the program developed along simple lines using existing military hardware with as few new developments as possible and, until recently, with no variety. Since 1960 no significant change has occurred in Soviet launch capability.

3. From its commencement in 1957 until the present, the Soviet program has reflected the belief that achievements in space will persuade the world that in the realms of science, technology, and military strength, the USSR surpasses all other nations in the world.

4. From the very early launchings the program has gradually broadened until it consists of five fairly discrete elements with well-defined purposes. These elements are the Kapustin Yar Cosmos series, the Tyuratam Cosmos series, a manned spaceflight program, an interplanetary program, and a lunar program. The total scope of this effort is not nearly so broad as that of the U.S. effort and reflects a selective choice of missions in the face of some limitations.

5. The Kapustin Yar Cosmos series is an astrogeophysical research project involving small payloads and begun in 1962, probably in response to demands by Soviet scientists for an opportunity to conduct the types of experiments in space that were being carried out in large numbers by U.S. scientists. This series appears to be limited to this purpose and is not suited for a reconnaissance mission despite suggestions that this might be the case by other members of the intelligence community.

6. A major purpose of the Tyuratam Cosmos series is almost certainly the development of a meteorological satellite. We believe that it is this satellite which the Soviets will use to fulfill its commitments in the cooperative agreement between the Academy of Sciences and NASA. The characteristics of the system [1 line of source text not declassified] appear to be adequate to do this and provide much higher resolution than planned U.S. systems. Because the vehicles used in this series are all recovered and some differences between vehicles have been noted, it is impossible to rule out the possibility that they might be engaged in reconnaissance or geodetic missions. Technical analysis has as yet revealed no firm positive indications of such missions, however.

7. In general, we have found no good evidence of the existence of Soviet plans or programs for the military use of space. While military support missions such as reconnaissance or geodetic fixing may possibly be undertaken, we consider it generally unlikely that the Soviets will deploy orbital bombardment systems in this decade. This position has been well defined in NIE 11-9-63.2

8. The Soviet manned space flight program is a conservative, well planned effort based upon the use of systems proven to be safe and reliable. Its long-term goals unquestionably include manned lunar landings and interplanetary flights but there is no evidence that their program is progressing on a crash basis. Current emphasis in Soviet bioastronautics work appears to center about the study of problems and the development of systems related to prolonged space flights and appears more responsive to the needs of a space station than to landing a man on the moon.

9. The interplanetary program is one characterized by failure but nevertheless vigorously pursued. It is expected that it will continue and that launchings will occur as suitable opportunities arise.

10. Lunar launchings were resumed in January of this year after a long hiatus, with the purpose of getting detailed data on the nature of the surface of the moon. We believe these probes were intended to soft-land on the moon but they may have been lunar orbiters with a mapping and reconnaissance mission. These probes were all failures, although Lunik 4 was successfully ejected from parking orbit but failed to fulfill its mission. The above points have been covered in briefings and in numerous OSI Scientific Intelligence Digests. It is estimated, on the basis of apparent constraints of celestial mechanics, that attempts to gather lunar surface data will begin again late in November of this year.

11. In our briefings and papers, OSI has stated its belief that the Soviets intend to compete vigorously in the early exploration of the moon and that this effort will include manned flights, although not manned lunar landings. A circumlunar manned flight is not an unreasonable mission in terms of currently existing Soviet launch vehicles once the rendezvous and docking techniques have been developed. A manned lunar orbiting mission might be accomplished, but to be practicable it would require a booster about twice as large as the SS-6. A clear purpose of such missions would be to enhance the prestige of the USSR and to offset the impact of an early manned lunar landing by the U.S.

12. We have also taken the position that it is not yet possible to settle with assurance the question as to whether or not the Soviets are engaged in a manned lunar landing program competitive with the United States. The analytical problem has essentially been one of not being able to find definitive indications of their being in such a race while having to admit that such indicators might exist without our being able to discover and identify them. Time is rapidly running out on this situation, however. In December 1962 in NIE 11-1-62,3 it was estimated that there was a better than even chance that the Soviets had a competitive manned lunar landing program though no firm conclusion could be reached. A later review of pertinent material produced essentially the same judgment. We still can find no firm evidence of the existence of such a program, but have, because of the passage of time, estimated that the chances of its existence are now something less than even. Though we have predicted the flight testing of a new larger booster and a new manned capsule, we still have no firm evidence of their early introduction. In addition, the Soviets have in the interim accomplished none of the technical prerequisites for a manned lunar landing outlined in NIE 11-1-62. This suggests, as well, that the Soviets might not have progressed to the point where they can make any substantial contribution to a cooperative program. Lovellʼs conversations are perhaps indicative in this regard but cannot be considered as conclusive evidence of a Soviet decision not to conduct a manned lunar landing.

13. In our view, if the Soviets are not engaged in an all-out manned landing program, we expect them to substitute major goals or somehow reduce the effects of the U.S. accomplishment of this mission. A cooperative venture with the U.S. for a manned lunar landing would reduce the Soviet problems in this regard tremendously. Where the question of cooperation has arisen, we have been most skeptical of both the technical feasibility of such a venture and of its long-term advantages. Goals likely to be substituted by the Soviets include the early lunar missions mentioned above and the establishment of a space station. Current Soviet capabilities would allow them to establish several different types of orbiting stations.





* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DCI (McCone) Files, Chrono: Job 80-B01285A. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text.

1 No record has been found of McConeʼs request for information. Five days earlier in a speech before the 18th General Assembly of the United Nations, President Kennedy had stated: “Finally, in a field where the United States and the Soviet Union have a special capacity—in the field of space—there is room for new cooperation, for further joint efforts in the regulation and exploration of space. I include among these possibilities a joint expedition to the moon.” For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 693-698. For documentation on U.S.-Soviet space cooperation, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XXV.

2 “Soviet Capabilities and Intentions to Orbit Nuclear Weapons,” July 15, 1963. (Johnson Library, National Security File, National Intelligence Estimates)

3 “Soviet Space Programs,” December 5, 1962. (Ibid.)





358. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, September 27, 1963.

Sino-Soviet Relations

Moscow and Peiping are relentlessly pursuing their political warfare aimed at discrediting each other and winning the allegiance of foreign parties. The Chinese and Soviet parties are each apparently operating on the assumption that the conflict will be protracted and inconclusive. Neither side seems to believe that the other will allow itself to be provoked into some irreparable action that would precipitate a complete break in party relations and possibly even diplomatic ties. At the same time, each party is making strenuous efforts to place itself in the strongest possible position in the event they are forced into open rupture.

The Soviet leaders clearly are confident that Peipingʼs refusal to sign the nuclear test ban treaty has provided them with a potent weapon in their drive to discredit and isolate the Chinese Communists. The long Soviet Government statement published on 21 and 22 September1 claimed that the Chinese have suffered a “serious moral and political defeat” and that their rejection of the treaty “amounts to complete apostasy” from the world Communist line. The whole thrust of the statement was to portray the Chinese leaders as bloodthirsty warmongers who are ready to embark on irresponsible adventures. It warned that Peipingʼs desire to acquire nuclear weapons causes “serious doubts concerning the foreign policy aims of Chinaʼs leaders,” and charged that they are committed to a “military solution of the contradictions between socialism and capitalism.”

The Soviet statement replied to recent Chinese charges of Soviet subversive activities in Sinkiang Province by claiming that Chinese “servicemen and civilians” have “systematically violated” the Soviet frontier since 1960. Moscow for the first time took notice of Peipingʼs declared intention to revise or abrogate “unjust” territorial settlements imposed on China by the “imperialists.” The statement warned that “artificial creation” of territorial disputes would mean “embarking on a very dangerous path” and strongly implied that Moscow will refuse to recognize Peipingʼs claims.

In the latest polemical exchanges both parties have gone so far as to call into question each otherʼs readiness to fulfill commitments under the Sino-Soviet Treaty of 1950. Peiping repeatedly has cast doubt on Soviet commitments and has accused the USSR of “flagrant violations” of the treaty. The Soviet statement charged Peiping with seeking to justify its desire to acquire nuclear weapons by denouncing Moscow as an “undependable ally.” It warned the Chinese against assuming that they could enjoy Soviet nuclear protection and at the same time continue to attack the USSR. To underscore this warning, Moscow quoted the Russian proverb: “Do not foul the well; you may need its waters.”

The Soviet statement concluded with a pro forma appeal for a cessation of polemics, but also with a thinly veiled threat of unspecified retaliatory actions if Peiping persists in attacking the USSR. It warned that the Chinese “must clearly realize that the most resolute rebuff from the Soviet party and people awaits them on this road.” Moscowʼs handling of two recent frontier train incidents suggests that any future Soviet reprisals may include a drastic curtailment or complete termination of the Chinese training program in the USSR. It is possible that the Russians are even contemplating a complete break in economic relations along the lines of Soviet action against Albania in 1961. There are also rumors in Moscow of a Soviet decision to break state relations with Peiping.

A Pravda article on 19 September, which blamed the Chinese for the failure to settle the Sino-Indian border dispute, constitutes Moscowʼs strongest and most extensive criticism to date of Peipingʼs policy on this issue. In an obvious attempt to discredit China in Afro-Asian eyes, Pravda deplored Peipingʼs refusal to “listen to the voice of reason” as embodied in the Colombo proposals of December 1962 and accused the Chinese of playing into the hands of the imperialists.

Peiping has shown its extreme sensitivity to Moscowʼs damaging charges that the Chinese leaders are “war maniacs”—inadvertently confirmed by a fumbling Chinese attempt on 1 September to “explain” Maoʼs remarks in 1957 concerning the probable outcome of a nuclear conflict2 —by attempting to return the polemical warfare to the area in which they have the better weapons. In the second major Chinese article in the projected series replying to the Soviet party pronouncement of 14 July, Peopleʼs Daily on 13 September adopted a disdainful, patronizing tone toward Khrushchev and assumed the role of faithful defender of Communist orthodoxy against the heretical Soviet premier.

The article, which was designed to exploit the disarray and demoralization in foreign parties created by Khrushchevʼs attacks on Stalin, was addressed primarily to hard-line factions in these parties to whom Peiping looks for support. It tried to show that Khrushchev is unworthy to head the world Communist movement and defined the ideal “head-quarters of the proletariat” in terms which fit only the Chinese Communist Party.

The article struck directly at Khrushchevʼs most vulnerable point by emphasizing that he had been “particularly active” in carrying out Stalinʼs suppression of Soviet “counterrevolutionaries” in the 1930s. With surpassing insolence, Peiping claimed that even a majority of people in the USSR itself disapproved of Khrushchevʼs attacks and “cherish” Stalinʼs memory.

While the Chinese strain to gain adherents outside China, there are indications that the Sino-Soviet rift, added to domestic economic difficulties, is creating morale problems in China. According to a report of an official inquiry into popular attitudes in a county of Kwangtung Province, many people are alarmed by the loss of Soviet support for industrialization and are pessimistic about the future. The US consul general in Hong Kong comments that this and another recent report show that Peipingʼs challenge to Moscow—while appealing to Chinese xenophobia—has also generated apprehension over the regimeʼs motives and possibly deepened doubts about its present course. (Confidential)

Soviet Foreign Policy Outlook

The dominant factor shaping Moscowʼs present foreign policy outlook appears to be its desire to avoid new crisis situations with the West while dealing with the increasingly bitter and damaging struggle with the Chinese Communists for leadership of the Communist movement. The serious economic problems facing the Soviet leaders, highlighted by the recent large-scale grain purchases in the West, probably have also strengthened their interest in a general improvement in Soviet-Western relations.

The moderate and “statesmanlike” tone of Foreign Minister Gromykoʼs speech to the UN General Assembly on 19 September3 was the most recent example of Soviet efforts to encourage a détente atmosphere. He urged all governments to use the favorable situation created by the test ban treaty to agree on further measures to ease tension and he carefully refrained from direct criticisms of US policy in such sensitive areas as Cuba and Southeast Asia. He gave only perfunctory attention to the German and Berlin problems and repeated Khrushchevʼs theme that, from the bloc viewpoint, the Berlin Wall has reduced the urgency of a German peace treaty.

In keeping with longstanding Soviet “détente tactics,” Gromykoʼs speech focused primarily on disarmament. His proposals for a heads-of-government meeting of the 18-nation disarmament committee during the first half of 1964 and for a US-Soviet treaty banning nuclear weapons in outer space were intended to demonstrate the USSRʼs constructive attitude. He also sought to underline Soviet flexibility by offering a further “concession” in Moscowʼs general disarmament plan which would permit the US and the USSR to retain a limited number of missiles and nuclear weapons until the end of the last stage of the disarmament process.

The Soviet leaders appear to see little early prospect for further agreements comparable to the test ban in importance. They are under no pressure, and they remain unwilling to make concessions as the price for agreement on major issues such as Berlin and Germany. They probably believe, moreover, that West German and French opposition will preclude agreement on such measures as a NATO-Warsaw Pact nonaggression treaty, a reduction of foreign forces in the two Germanys, and a nuclear-free zone in Central Europe. Khrushchev, however, probably hopes to draw the US and its allies into a protracted period of negotiation on partial disarmament and European security matters. He would calculate that such talks would intensify differences among the Western allies and increase the reluctance of some NATO members to proceed further with a multilateral NATO nuclear force.

While the Russians see no present opportunities for advancing their aims on major European questions, they apparently attach considerable importance to further bilateral agreements with the US as a means of keeping alive the momentum and atmosphere created by the test ban treaty. In addition to Soviet interest in agreements banning nuclear weapons in outer space and establishing legal principles for the peaceful uses of space, Moscow has indicated a desire to conclude a consular convention and a civil air transport agreement.

Although the USSR has termed President Kennedyʼs UN address4 an “encouraging” and “sober” approach to world problems, it has not yet reacted publicly to his proposal for a joint manned lunar landing project. Gromyko, however, told Ambassador Kohler on 10 September that the USSR agrees in principle to the US concept of joint cooperation in outer space programs. (Secret; No Foreign Dissem; Background Use Only)



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. The first article is Confidential; the second is Secret; No Foreign Dissem; Background Use Only. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises pp. 3-6 of the issue.

1 For text, see Current Digest of the Soviet Press, vol. XV, No. 38, October 16, 1963, pp. 3-15.

2 A reference to Maoʼs speech in Moscow, November 1957, quoted in a “Statement by the Spokesman of the Chinese Government,” September 1, 1963, which is printed in People of the World, Unite for the Complete, Thorough, Total and Resolute Prohibition and Destruction of Nuclear Weapons! (Peking, 1963), p. 42.

3 For excerpts from the text, see Documents on Disarmament, 1963, pp. 509-524.

4 For excerpts from the text, see ibid., pp. 525-531. For full text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 693-698.





359. Summary Record of the National Security Council MeetingSource


Washington, October 1, 1963, 10:20 a.m.

Proposed Sale of U.S. Wheat to the USSR and Soviet Satellites

Secretary Freeman summarized the Canadian-Soviet wheat negotiations.1 He then gave the latest information about a group of grain traders who are interested in selling U.S. wheat to the USSR. He called attention to the purchase by the USSR of flour from West Germany which had been milled from wheat sold to the West Germans by the U.S. He said the U.S. had ample surplus of wheat to sell the three million tons which the Russians allegedly are interested in purchasing. He was ready to make the sale if the President decided to do so.

In response to the Presidentʼs question, Secretary Freeman estimated that the Russians were interested in purchasing between $150 million and $200 million worth of wheat at present prices—approximately three million tons. In response to a second question by the President, Secretary Freeman said we had no indication that the Russians were interested in purchasing other commodities, such as cotton or oil.

Acting Secretary Ball reported on his appearance before a Senate Committee yesterday in which he set forth the pros and cons of a U.S. wheat deal with the USSR. He said that even the Senators favorable to a wheat deal are concerned about Congressional reaction if the Administration agreed to a wheat deal without regard to the Latta amendment.2 This amendment states that it is the policy of Congress that sale of agricultural commodities are to be made only to “friendly nations.” Those Senators favoring the sale believe that the Administration will be criticized because of acting contrary to this statement of Congressional policy. Mr. Ball said we could say that conditions have changed since 1961 when the amendment was approved and that the deal we were making with the Soviet Union was a single sale. The question remained, however, as to how to deal with a Congressional statement which seeks to limit the Presidentʼs area of decision. Mr. Ball stated the pros and cons of the wheat deal from the international political viewpoint: 1. The purchase by the USSR of large amounts of wheat can be portrayed as a failure of Communism. The Soviet system is unable to provide sufficient food for its citizens and has to come to the West in order to meet its food needs.

2. The purchase of U.S. wheat diverts Soviet resources from arms to food. Soviet monetary reserves are not unlimited. In order to pay for the wheat, the USSR would have to use gold, which costs the Soviets about $65 an ounce to produce and is worth only $35 an ounce on the world market.

3. We have a long tradition of helping the Russian people in periods of famine. Mr. Harriman recalls comments by Russians made to him during World War II about the Hoover food relief campaign of World War I. If we turned down the Soviet deal, we would be breaking this tradition.

4. During the months it would take to deliver the wheat to the Soviet Union, the Soviet Government would be prompted to maintain a status quo lest the wheat delivery be halted.





Mr. Ball said the arguments against the deal are: 1. The Soviets have grain resources and therefore are not in absolute need of U.S. wheat.

2. Some of the wheat sold to the USSR would undoubtedly be shipped to Soviet satellites.

3. If we engage in trade of this magnitude with the USSR, it will be difficult for us to continue to urge the underdeveloped nations to avoid becoming economically dependent on theUSSR. The result would probably be that underdeveloped nations would increase their trade with the USSR.





In response to a question, Secretary Freeman said that we had sold very little to the USSR primarily because the Soviets had never asked to purchase our grain. Secretary Hodges commented that during 1962 we had sold approximately $62 million worth of food products to all the satellites. Mr. Ball said the Russians knew that we would have sold food products to them if they had asked us.

Secretary Hodges said he believed we should sell the wheat to the USSR. On the basis of his appearance yesterday before the Senate Committee, he thought that those who opposed the wheat deal do so on a partisan basis. He noted that the Commerce Department would receive today a request from a U.S. trader for a license to sell three million tons of wheat to the USSR. Czech Government officials have called on him twice. In talking to the Czechs, he had tried to discuss the immediate spot grain situation. However, the Czechs kept talking about trade relations with them in the future. He said one way to proceed would be to decide what we would do with a request for a license to ship wheat then wait thirty days to see what Congressional reaction would be. The President read the following extract from the attached memorandum from Assist-ant Secretary Dutton, dated September 30:3

“As a procedural matter, the wheat sale should not be consummated until the Administration has obtained formal action by both Houses reconsidering the so-called Latta amendment to the Agricultural Act of 1961, expressing the sense of Congress that subsidized commodities should not be sold to theUSSR.” The President asked whether formal action by the Congress was necessary. Both Secretary Hodges and Secretary Freeman said they did not think formal action was required.

Secretary Ball commented that in 1961 Congress could have included in the Agriculture Surplus Law the statement contained in the Latta amendment. Congress, however, did not do so, but chose rather to state merely the policy it thought should be followed. The Congress did not choose to tie the Presidentʼs hands. The President, therefore, could act in the national interest as he saw fit. He could say that he had decided to sell wheat to the USSR after consultation with the Congress and on the basis of public support. He repeated an earlier statement to the effect that Senator Ellender,4 who favored the deal, acknowledged that there would be Congressional grumbling if the President chose to act contrary to the Congressional statement of policy.

Secretary Freeman said that Senator Ellender had told him last night that he did not want the Administration to ask for Congressional action. Senator Ellender favors the sale and had meant to make clear during the afternoon hearing merely the Congressional sensitivity involved in dealing with the Latta amendment. Secretary Freeman said that the people who are against the wheat deal will use the Latta amendment as the basis of their opposition, but that the overwhelming majority of the Congress would favor the wheat sale.

Acting Secretary Gilpatric5 said that the Joint Chiefsʼ view and his and Mr. Nitzeʼs personal view was that there was no military or strategic objection to the sale of wheat to the USSR as a one-shot operation.

In response to the Presidentʼs question, Secretary Freeman said that the price of wheat sold to the Russians would be the same as that offered to any buyer. The wheat would come out of CCC stocks and would be sold at 105% of the loan rate. The transaction would be negotiated and implemented by private traders. The Government would not get into it because it was not staffed to do so. The private traders would be pleased to have the business and the farmers would be pleased because they would expect that a sizable sale would have an eventual beneficial effect on wheat prices. Secretary Freeman said the Soviets may ask for a fixed price. Possibly we could agree on a price ceiling. In other words, we could merely announce that licenses will be issued to traders who wish to sell U.S. wheat to the USSR and the Soviet satellites, or we could officially negotiate with the Soviet Government on a flexible price. Secretary Freeman opposed a fixed price. If a private trader negotiated the price and undertook to deliver the wheat, their profit margin would be narrow because the wheat trading business is highly competitive. There is no danger of profiteering or windfall profits. Mr. Sorensen added that under certain circumstances the traders could even take a loss on the deal.

In response to the Presidentʼs question, Under Secretary Murphy6 said he had nothing to add to what had already been said and he noted that although the economic and commercial pros of the wheat deal are important, they are not of sufficient importance to override any cons based on national security considerations.

Secretary Freeman thought that the deal would have a beneficial political effect in U.S. wheat growing areas.

Under Secretary Harriman said that George Meany was strongly opposed to trading with the USSR but approved the sale of U.S. wheat. Secretary Hodges said he had talked to Meany, who had agreed not to oppose the deal for the time being and to hold off efforts to encourage longshoremen to refuse to load U.S. wheat going to Russia.

Mr. Harriman noted that we may get a request from the Soviet Union for the extension of credit. Secretary Freeman pointed out that we could extend regular commercial credit up to eighteen months.

Mr. Harriman commented that the Soviets will get the wheat they need one way or another. If we do not sell it to them, they will always be in a position to buy U.S. wheat which we have sold to European States.

The President commented that if we decide to go ahead with the wheat deal we should make clear in any statement issued at the time that the Russians would be able to get U.S. wheat whether we sold it to them or not.

Secretary Freeman said the Russians could obtain 300,000 tons of flour from West Germany, most of which was milled from U.S. wheat. The President asked whether we would sell to the Germans if we knew in advance that they were going to resell the wheat to the USSR.

Secretary Freeman replied that we would be happy to make such a sale to the Germans. He went on to say that when he saw Khrushchev,7 the Soviet leader did not raise the purchase of wheat and said that the USSR would not buy food. The Russian crop was said to be normal. Secretary Freeman commented that the recent grain purchases had apparently been decided upon after he had been in the Soviet Union and presumably after the Russians had realized the extent of their crop failure.

In response to the Presidentʼs question, Acting CIA Director Carter said he had no comment.

Governor Herter pointed out that in the State Department memorandum there was mention of the possibility of prohibiting the resale by the Soviet Union of U.S. wheat to Communist China, Korea, Vietnam and Cuba. He felt that if this could be done, the reaction in Congress would be beneficial. Secretary Hodges replied that such limitations on resale could be accomplished by including this requirement in the U.S. license for the sale.

The President asked what was the next step; would we merely announce that we were granting licenses for the sale of wheat to the USSR and that the traders could apply for license?

Secretary Freeman said that an effort had been made by the private U.S. traders to organize a group to deal with the Soviet negotiators in Montreal. However, the group broke apart primarily because the traders thought they might do better operating alone. The competition for the grain deal would be cutthroat. The licenses would merely be issued to the traders.



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSC Meetings. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. A tape recording of the meeting is ibid., Presidentʼs Office Files, Presidential Recordings, Tapes 113.5 and 114/A49.

1 On September 16 the Soviet Union and Canada completed an agreement for the sale of 5.3 million tons of wheat.

2 For text of the Latta amendment, see Section 2(c) of the Agriculture Act of 1961, 75 Stat. 294.

3 Not found.

4 Allen J. Ellender, Chairman of the Senate Agriculture and Forestry Committee.

5 Roswell L. Gilpatric, Deputy Secretary of Defense.

6 Under Secretary of Agriculture, Charles S. Murphy.

7 See footnote 7, Document 341.





360. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, October 7, 1963, 10:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

East-West Relations; the Gromyko Talks



PARTICIPANTS

French Foreign Minister Couve de Murville

Ambassador Alphand

M. Charles Lucet, Director of Political Affairs, Foreign Ministry

M. Pierre Pelen, French Emb.





U.S. The Secretary

Ambassador Bohlen

Mr. William R. Tyler

Mr. Johannes V. Imhof, WE





East-West Relations

The Secretary said that it was important not to have any illusions about the current status of East-West relations. It was premature to speak of a détente. There have been two concrete developments: a hot line between Moscow and Washington, reserved for emergencies, has been established as a result of the Cuba crisis when normal communications between the two governments could no longer keep in step with developments. This line has not been used as yet. Secondly, a limited test ban agreement has been concluded.

On concrete problems, there has been no sign of a real detente. With regard to Laos, Gromyko had said that the Soviets remained committed to the Geneva accords and that things would be much worse if they werenʼt. Nevertheless, the situation was far from good. Polish members of the ICC remain uncooperative and the Viet Minh presence in Laos continues.

On Vietnam, there was a complete impasse.

With regard to Cuba, the Soviets were telling us that there were no longer any Soviet operational military units there and that only technicians and training personnel were left. We have indications that the Soviets have indeed removed four battalions but they continue to man anti-aircraft installations and are maintaining some 7,000 military personnel. Castro continues to interfere with other countries in the Western hemisphere. The Soviets have perhaps prevented Cuba from erupting, but Soviet military presence and Soviet interferences in the Western hemisphere remain non-negotiable issues. Continuing on Cuba, the Secretary said that we understood there were two main schools of thought in Cuba: a pro-Soviet and a pro-Chinese orientation. Perhaps there was also some Titoist sentiment but we had been unable to discern any movement in favor of reconciliation with the West. The Secretary expressed his appreciation for previous reports received from the French Embassy in Havana and said he hoped that we would continue to receive these reports. Couve indicated we would.

On Berlin, there were also no new developments. If the Soviets gave full assurances on accession and concentrated on East Germany, some pressure on us from neutrals might develop. As yet, there were no indications that the Soviets would move in this direction but the possibility remained that they might adopt such a course. Gromyko had described the situation as “important and acute”.

With regard to Eastern Europe, we had noticed a slight improvement. No Americans were imprisoned any longer in Czechoslovakia. Some progress had been made in negotiations on the settlement of old financial claims. The Rumanian Foreign Minister had stated that he was interested in improving relations with the West. None of these developments were in any sense conclusive.

Gromyko Talks

Turning to the recent discussions with Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko1 the Secretary said that Gromyko had not taken the initiative in mentioning the non-aggression pact. It was U Thant2 who had done so. We considered the NAP a non-starter because the Soviets had indicated that they considered it an item per se and refused to link it with an improvement in the Berlin situation. Moreover, there was a great deal of skepticism in this country regarding the meaning of an NAP. Such a pact could come at the end of a settlement of issues but not at the outset.

The Secretary said the Soviets had shown interest in a non-dissemination agreement and had taken the initiative in bringing this up. The Soviets seemed to desire that the four existing nuclear powers should remain the only ones. On the other hand, the Soviets had taken the position that the Multilateral Force would be incompatible with a non-dissemination agreement. Soviet opposition to the Multilateral Force may be based on their apprehension at seeing the resources of Europe mobilized along with ours in the nuclear field. On the other hand, Soviet opposition to the Multilateral Force could be based on concern with regard to Germany. If this were the case, the Soviets might take a different view once the MLF comes into being and once they have a chance to look at it in detail.

The Secretary reminded M. Couve de Murville that he had once said that it would be an important point if the Soviets agreed on observation posts. Gromyko had discussed observation posts but had linked them to the concept of a denuclearized zone and to troop reductions.

The Secretary said that the Soviets had shown no interest in agreed destruction of weapons (B-47ʼs and Badgers). We were interested in such an agreement because we would like to prevent or at least limit the introduction of these weapons in the Near East and countries like Indonesia.

The Soviets reiterated their proposal for reduction in military budgets but we do not see any basis for a meaningful comparison between military budgets. For example, our soldiers receive a base pay of $120, far in excess of what a Soviet soldier receives.

With regard to disarmament, the Secretary said that Gromyko was rather gloomy, saw little prospect in the Geneva conference, and tended to blame us for lack of progress. The Secretary said he had taken Gromyko up on this and had told him that the U.S. defense increment since the last World War had increased by $500 billion as a result of Soviet actions. Gromyko had not contested this point. In general, the Soviets had studiously abstained from any kind of ideological discussion and had adopted instead a practical attitude. The only exception was that Gromyko had launched into an attack against the West German regime and had claimed that our policy was being entrapped by West Germany. The Secretary said he had made it plain to Gromyko that our interest in the German problem and in Berlin was based on our own security.

Lastly, the Secretary mentioned a number of bilateral problems which were being discussed with the Soviets, among them a consular agreement.

The Secretary noted that in June the Soviets had suddenly stopped jammingVOA broadcasts and had made an announcement to this effect. This was a surprising move, probably related to some extent to Soviet-Chinese differences. We were taking advantage of this by broadcasting information on developments often well in advance of Soviet announcements. For example, we had broadcast the Presidentʼs offer for a joint expedition to the moon before the Soviets had announced it. M. Couve de Murville speculated that the Soviets were perhaps using all their jamming facilities against the Chinese.

The Secretary said that we were also interested in setting up a telex communication line between our Embassy in Moscow and our Embassy in Paris.

Furthermore, there was the possibility of a civil air agreement which would permit two weekly flights.

On wheat, there were indications that the Soviets might wish to buy up to 4 million tons from us. The President was now looking into this. There would be certain advantages to such a sale. It would help our food problem, it would help our balance-of-payments problem, and it would seem advantageous to siphon off some of the Soviet foreign exchange in this manner. On the other hand, there might be problems in Europe. M. Couve de Murville interjected that there would be no problem as far as the French were concerned. The Secretary referred to Chancellor Adenauerʼs recent statement on the subject. The Secretary said that the Soviet interest in buying wheat was quite new. During the signing of the test ban agreement in Moscow, Khrushchev had shown no interest in buying consumers goods on a large scale.

M. Couve de Murville said he would like to comment on some of the specific points mentioned by the Secretary, but he would like to approach the problem of East-West relations from a general point of view. Before doing so, however, he wanted to comment briefly on the wheat agreement. From the French point of view, there were no objections whatsoever to wheat sales, which the French considered normal trade practice. France had been selling some wheat to the Chinese Communists and limited amounts of flour to the Soviets. Chancellor Adenauerʼs recent position on wheat sales was new. Until now, he had opposed the sale of strategic goods which could help the Soviet war potential. The Secretary said that we have accepted this view with the result that our trade with theUSSR amounts to $35 million whereas European trade, and especially German trade, with the East is much higher. Couve agreed. He then turned to the general problem of East-West relations.

M. Couve de Murville said there was one fact and one development. There was the Moscow agreement and there were the negotiations that may flow from it.

The Moscow agreement was something specific. It was generally understood that this is a US-USSR agreement which came about because both sides wanted it. The agreement had been signed by a great number of states which had no intention or no capability of developing nuclear forces. The agreement had also been signed by Germany which, in 1954, had voluntarily agreed to limitations going considerably beyond the terms of the Moscow agreement. On the other hand, the treaty had not been signed by Communist China nor by France. For reasons that were well known, France could not sign the treaty.

Couve continued that the Moscow agreement, while not significant from a military point of view, was important politically. The treaty was regarded as a starter which could lead to agreements on other things. Indeed, both sides had agreed to continue the talks and these talks, almost without exception, concerned points on which the Soviets have always been, and continue to remain, adamant. The Secretary said that non-dissemination was an exception. Couve agreed but said that the Soviets continued to oppose theMLF.

M. Couve de Murville said that these talks were making the Germans nervous. For its part, the French Government could see no advantage in these discussions. The French Government feared that the only result of these talks would be to lead the Germans to question their relationship with the West. Couve alluded to the earlier series of talks with the Soviets in the first half of 1962 which the French had also considered useless and dangerous in the sense that they could lead to a deterioration of the political climate in Germany.

Couve de Murville said that France was, of course, no less desirous than the United States in improving relations with the Soviets but felt that this improvement should be sought by different means. He said that the Western attitude toward the Soviets had on the whole been defensive. A true detente could be achieved only if the Soviets refrained from threatening. For example, as soon as the Soviets would make it clear with regard to Berlin that they were no longer threatening access, the elements for a realistic detente would exist.

M. Couve de Murville stressed that there were no substantive but only procedural differences between the U.S. and the French on these talks with the Soviets. He said that the French had never harbored any doubts about the U.S. position and had never assumed that we would concede anything to the Soviets in these talks. The mere fact that these talks were taking place before the elements of a real détente were present could lead, however, to a deterioration of the political climate in Europe.

Commenting on the Secretaryʼs question why the Soviets continued to attack the West German regime, M. Couve de Murville said that he believed the Soviet concern about Germany was quite real. It was the result of the last war when all parts of Eastern Europe and vast regions of the Soviet Union had been occupied by the Germans. M. Couve de Murville said that this Soviet concern with regard to Germany probably also explains Soviet opposition to the MLF. The Secretary said that it was possible that the Soviets believe what we are saying with regard to the MLF but that they think that we are wrong. Couve agreed and reiterated his belief that Soviet concern about Germany was real.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Secretaryʼs Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Drafted by Imhof and approved in S on October 13. Couve de Murville was in the United States to attend the U.N. General Assembly session. The source text indicates it is Part 2 of 6. Parts 1 and 4-6 are ibid.; Part 3 is printed in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XV, pp. 587-590.

1 For a report on the conversation on October 2, see ibid., pp. 583-584; a summary of the second conversation, October 3, which included Lord Home, is in Department of State, Central Files, POL 38-10.

2 Secretary General of the United Nations.





361. Editorial Note


In a memorandum to Secretary of Defense McNamara, October 8, 1963, Joseph Carroll, Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, reported that an assessment of Soviet military personnel in Cuba, prepared in collaboration with the Central Intelligence Agency, concluded that “Soviet military personnel withdrawals are continuing and that total Soviet military strength in Cuba is now estimated to be between 5,000 and 8,000—representing a reduction to date of at least two-thirds of the number originally estimated to be on the island during the crisis. Most of those remaining are advisors and technicians engaged in training Cuban personnel.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XI, pages 873-874.

Two days later Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko assured President Kennedy and Secretary of State Rusk during their meeting in Washington that “there were now no Soviet troops in Cuba. The Soviet personnel now in Cuba were specialists training the Cubans in the use of arms supplied by the USSR. When this limited task was accomplished these would be withdrawn.” Upon being asked by Kennedy “how many Soviet military specialists would remain in Cuba in, say, six months,” Gromyko replied that “he preferred not to speak in terms of dates but he wished to ask the President to understand that the USSR had in Cuba only military specialists with a limited mission.” For text of the memorandum of conversation, see ibid., pages 875-877. At a White House meeting on November 13, Director of Central Intelligence McCone reported that the Soviets were “continuing a gradual withdrawal” but that “no military equipment has been withdrawn.” For text of McConeʼs memorandum for the record, see ibid., pages 883-885.





362. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, October 10, 1963, 11:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

US-USSR Trade



PARTICIPANTS

US The Secretary

Under Secretary Ball

Under Secretary for Political Affairs Harriman

Ambassador Thompson

Assistant Secretary Tyler

Mr. Akalovsky, ACDA/IR





USSR Foreign Minister Gromyko1

Deputy Foreign Minister Semenov

Ambassador Dobrynin

Mr. Kovalev, Adviser to the Foreign Minister

Mr. Makashev, Assistant to the Foreign Minister

Mr. Bubnov, Soviet Embassy

Mr. Sukhodrev, Foreign Ministry





The Secretary expressed gratification that Mr. Gromyko had come to Washington and that this discussion could take place. He observed that there were several unfinished points to be discussed and suggested that perhaps Mr. Gromyko could indicate which of them could be discussed first.

Mr. Gromyko commented that the Secretary and he had covered several questions in New York and that perhaps it would be useful to continue the exchange of views on those questions. He noted, however, that some points had been practically not dealt with in the New York conversations. In this connection, he recalled that some time ago the Secretary had mentioned the possibility of discussing commercial relations between the US and the USSR and had indicated he might comment on this matter at a later point. He wondered whether the Secretary could express his views on this problem now.

The Secretary said that we were interested in taking up with the USSR the discussion of possibilities in the trade field and of the problems necessarily involved with it. He thought Mr. Gromyko had probably observed in the press that the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, as a result of a meeting held yesterday, had decided to re-examine the trade policy with the Soviet Union and the other socialist states. This was because the Senate Foreign Relations Committee had a lively interest in the possibility of progress in this area. However, the Secretary pointed out that the lend-lease problem, which had been with us for some time, still existed and was related to the existing legislative barriers, primarily those relating to commercial credits, etc. The Secretary then recalled his remark in Moscow that we had some commercial practices in connection with which difficulties might also arise, but said we would try to deal with them as constructively as possible. In addition, there were problems on such matters as copyright, patents and dumping, where adjustments would be required on the Soviet side.

The Secretary continued that there were some inherent operational difficulties in trade between a free competitive system like ours and a highly organized and planned system such as that existing in the USSR. Nevertheless, he believed such difficulties could be resolved, noting they appeared to have been resolved in trade relations between the USSR and other “capitalist” countries. The Secretary thought while the Executive Branch was dealing with Congress on these matters, perhaps quiet discussion between the US and USSR could be initiated either in Washington or in Moscow to explore the problems which exist in the field of trade. He then invited Under Secretary Ball to comment, noting Mr. Ball was an expert in economics.

Under Secretary Ball observed that, as distinct from European states, the US had not had the practice of bilateral trade agreements. This would require much exploration, because we were not familiar with that practice and there were a number of statutory and constitutional problems involved here. However, he believed that the problems the Secretary had referred to were soluble. One problem which he thought would cause trouble was that of most-favored-nation treatment, i.e., the problem of tariff legislation, but even that depended on the type of commodity. Mr. Ball continued that these matters could be developed only when we proceeded further in our discussions, if it was decided to have such discussions. He believed there were possibilities for an expansion of trade between the two countries and that an exploration of these possibilities would be profitable to both sides.

The Secretary pointed out that after coming back from Moscow he had taken administrative action, where possible, to ease trade between our two countries, and noted that he would not have taken such action before his trip to Moscow. The action he referred to applied primarily to the granting of export licenses. He then inquired what Mr. Gromykoʼs views were regarding the possibility of exploring, either in Washington or in Moscow, the problem under discussion.

Mr. Gromyko wondered whether it was correct to understand that the US was considering changes, to the extent this was possible, both in legislation and in operational procedures. As to the former, he commented that the form would not be important; e.g., the USSR might not be mentioned by name. As to the latter, he said he understood that this aspect might be easier to change.

The Secretary agreed with Mr. Gromykoʼs last remark, but pointed out that this would be true only if such changes did not challenge Congressional policy.

Under Secretary Ball commented that from the standpoint of procedure it might perhaps be easier first to see what could be done within the existing legislative framework and only then to turn to the broader problem of legislation.

The Secretary noted other “socialist” countries had approached us on matters of trade. As Mr. Gromyko knew, one of the difficulties here was the existence of unsettled financial obligations on the part of those countries, but we had reached agreement with Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia so that this should not be a problem. The most immediate problem was that of most-favored-nation treatment, particularly in the case of Yugoslavia and Poland. Although such treatment might perhaps be granted by Congress to Yugoslavia this year, the Secretary doubted that it would be granted to Poland because there was a great deal of unhappiness in Congress, as well as in the Executive Branch, about the attitude of the Polish Representative on the ICC in Laos. In this connection, the Secretary observed that, while these two matters were perhaps objectively unrelated, one should recognize that there was a relationship here. The Secretary agreed with Mr. Ball that we should first concentrate on what could be done within the existing legislative framework, pointing out that it would be most undesirable to make an early effort on such matters as the Johnson Act and experience a failure.

Mr. Gromyko said that he wished to emphasize once again what had been said earlier by the USSR at the highest level, namely, that discriminatory practices created difficulties for improving relations between our two countries in the broadest sense of that term. It was for this reason that the USSR believed that it would be better to have those practices abolished. If the United States, and the President personally, believed that some action would be ripe for execution eventually, such action would be a major step in improving our relations. Mr. Gromyko said he had understood the Secretary to say that such eventual action would embrace both the general US trade policy and the operation practices by which US companies were guided in trade with the USSR, or, more correctly, in the absence of such trade. He said he was pleased to hear this and reiterated that this would be good from the broad standpoint of US-USSR relations; this would be in the interest of both the US and the USSR as well as the world at large, and neither side would gain any unilateral advantage. As to how and when these matters could be discussed between our two countries, Mr. Gromyko felt either Moscow or Washington would be practical, but noted that he wished to consult with his Government and would give a reply in a few days. In any event, he believed that if the US was prepared to discuss these matters in the immediate future there would be no procrastination on the part of the USSR.

The Secretary commented that from our standpoint it would be more convenient, at least in the early stages, to have those discussions in Washington, because of our need to be in touch with Congress and the Department of Commerce. He noted, however, that this was not a hard position, but simply a matter of convenience from our standpoint.

Mr. Gromyko said the USSR would take into account the Secretaryʼs remark. Referring to Mr. Ballʼs comments, he wondered whether he had understood correctly that Mr. Ball foresaw some difficulties in having a formal agreement.

Under Secretary Ball commented this pattern was different from the one we had been using, but perhaps it was possible. In any event, he did not rule it out.

The Secretary asked Mr. Gromyko whether Soviet trade arrangements with Western Europe were based on bilateral trade agreements.

Mr. Gromyko replied in the affirmative and said this was the usual pattern.

The Secretary asked Mr. Ball whether the US had bilateral trade agreements with anyone.

The Under Secretary replied that as Europe had moved from the situation existing immediately after the war, where there had been a shortage of foreign currency to a situation of free convertibility of currency and of free trade, our trade with Western Europe was based on multilateral agreements. However, European countries had had experience in bilateral arrangements. As to the US, we would need some adjustment in our practices.

The Secretary then said that our two countries would have to find products they could buy from each other, because apparently our trade would be bilateral. The problem was that our two countries produced similar things, and therefore we would have to explore this matter and try to find an economic basis. In this connection, he noted there was now a surplus of US tourist exchange going to the USSR; if that surplus continued, it would enable the USSR to buy more on the US market.

Mr. Gromyko said he wished to remind the US side that the US and the USSR had had a trade agreement before the war. He believed that the situation obtaining at that time had justified such an agreement, but then the war came and things changed completely.

He then said he wished to take up some of the points the Secretary had raised. In particular, he wondered whether the US had thought about the problem of credits, and also what relation the US saw between the problem of lend-lease and US-USSR trade relations. As to the latter point, he recalled that three or four years ago, Mr. Mikoyan had stated the Soviet view on this matter, but noted that practically no discussion of the problem had taken place since then.

The Secretary commented that the latest attempt to resolve this problem had failed because the USSR had wished to discuss at the same time the problems of trade and credits. He pointed out that the problem of lend-lease was involved in our legislation so that it would have to be resolved.

The Under Secretary commented that lend-lease was related to credits. There were two problems as regard credits: 1) there was the Johnson Act which provided that no loans could be granted before lend-lease was settled and 2) there was the question of definition of credits, because if credits were on such a long-term basis that this would make it look like assistance, this would create difficulties. The position we took on wheat was to interpret the Johnson Act as not applicable to normal commercial payments, but we could not apply this interpretation to such things as machinery, etc.

The Secretary commented this meant that we could not extend credits as they had been extended by some West European countries, without amending the Johnson Act.

The Under Secretary agreed that we could not unless lend-lease was settled.

Mr. Gromyko said he wished to emphasize that his remarks were only exploratory and should not be understood as an application for loans.

The Secretary said he understood that and stated we were prepared to examine these problems in all of their aspects if the development of our relations continued as we hoped it would. He then expressed the view that it was unfortunate that the cold war period following the last war had interfered with the classic concept of trade, namely, that trade should benefit both sides. In this connection, he recalled that Mr. Khrushchev had endorsed this concept. The Secretary regretted that there had been developments during the post war period which had distorted this classic concept.

Mr. Gromyko believed it would be best if the entire problem were resolved. However, he thought that if the two sides should be unable to agree on some of its aspects, e.g., on such a matter as lend-lease, which strictly speaking was not part of the trade problem anyway, lack of agreement on such aspects should not hamper the development of other aspects of trade relations between our two countries. He did not believe there should be a tight package.

The Secretary commented that he could agree with this in theory, but noted that the problem must be examined.

Mr. Gromyko wondered what the Secretaryʼs views were in terms of time, i.e., when legislative and operational changes could be expected.

The Secretary said that one thing was certain: no change could be expected during this session of Congress. Congress was swamped with legislation this year, and anybody suggesting additional new legislation would have a very hard time. In any event, we were not ready yet politically and consequently we would have many months to examine all these problems.

The Under Secretary expressed the view that we should see what steps or progressive adjustments could be brought about, noting this could facilitate change in legislation.

Mr. Gromyko wondered whether the Secretary could comment on the second part of his question.

The Secretary replied that the US had kept these matters under review; there had been some movement on them, and perhaps further movement was possible. He noted that this depended on individual items and that the Secretary of Commerce and he were frequently consulting on these matters. While he believed further movement was possible, he felt that it would be misleading to make a generalized statement. In this connection, he thought Ambassador Dobrynin must have seen statements by Secretary Hodges and Secretary Freeman which had a bearing on this matter. While he himself had not said much on this subject, he believed that fresh possibilities existed in this area.

Mr. Gromyko said the President of Amtorg in New York had told him about inquiries on the part of US companies regarding trade with the USSR, but apparently those inquiries had not resulted in anything. He thought perhaps those matters were under consideration in the Administration, because the components were apparently inquiring in terms of future possibilities rather than immediate transactions.

Ambassador Dobrynin interjected that two or three cases, including textiles, had been resolved favorably.

The Secretary then inquired whether Mr. Gromyko dealt with trade matters a great deal.

Mr. Gromyko replied in the negative but noted that the Ministry of Foreign Trade was headed by his former deputy, Mr. Patolichev, so that the Foreign Ministry was familiar with the problem.

The Secretary then stressed the psychological value for trade of movement by the USSR on such matters as copyright. In this connection, he noted that some “socialist” states had agreed to certain arrangements in this field; indeed, Bulgaria had accepted the International Copyright Convention.

Mr. Gromyko facetiously remarked that the Secretary had probably raised this point in order to knock him out, because he knew nothing about the subject. He acknowledged that this point had been raised with the Soviet Union on several occasions and observed that Soviet organizations dealing with the matter were not particularly enthusiastic about it. He thought the matter would probably be discussed again, but said he did not know what would come out.

The Secretary observed that Mr. Gromyko would surely agree that there were some points which, while not of great practical importance, were significant from a psychological standpoint.

At this point the Secretary invited the group to join him for lunch where the discussion could be continued.2



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Secretaryʼs Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved in S on October 16 and in U on October 23. The meeting was held in the Secretaryʼs office.

1 Gromyko was in the United States to attend the U.N. General Assembly session.

2 No record of the luncheon conversation has been found, but at a dinner at the Soviet Embassy at 8 p.m. Rusk, Ball, and Gromyko discussed the kinds of trade that might develop and at what level exploratory talks might take place. (Memorandum of conversation; Department of State, Central Files, FT US-USSR) At dinner Gromyko also mentioned the negotiations for a consular convention, nuclear-free zones, and travel restrictions. Memoranda of the conversations on these subjects are ibid., Secretaryʼs Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330; and ibid., Central Files, DEF 18-9 and POL 36 USSR.





363. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, October 10, 1963, 4 p.m.

SUBJECT

US-USSR Relations



PARTICIPANTS

US The President

The Secretary

Ambassador Thompson

Assistant Secretary Tyler

Mr. Akalovsky, ACDA/IR





USSR Foreign Minister Gromyko

Deputy Foreign Minister Semenov

Ambassador Dobrynin

Mr. Sukhodrev, Foreign Ministry





Mr. Gromyko said he wished to raise the matter of broad relations between the US and the USSR. He thought the Secretary and himself were in agreement that our two countries occupied a position in the world which was decisive in determining, in the long run, whether or not there would be agreement on any important problem in the world. He recalled that the President had expressed a similar thought during last yearʼs conversation.1 He had reported this to Mr. Khrushchev and the latter believed that this was a reasonable view. If this were to be personified, he believed that understanding between the President and Mr. Khrushchev was most important for the world. The USSR was familiar with the Presidentʼs speech on June 10 at the American University.2 He believed the President was aware of the assessment his statements, including the one at the American University, had been given in the USSR. The Presidentʼs statements had been received positively in the USSR, both by the Soviet Government as a whole and by Mr. Khrushchev in particular. This was a definite and deliberate line in the Soviet policy vis-à-vis the US. If the US took the same line, then there was reason for an optimistic assessment of the prospects for the development of our relations. What the Soviet Union wanted to do was to give this a concrete form. Perhaps this was not new to the President, because all messages from Mr. Khrushchev were in this spirit. If this line was followed with determination then such synthetic (sic) problems as disarmament, Germany, etc., could be resolved much more easily than in a situation where the two sides quarreled.

The President said he appreciated Mr. Gromykoʼs remarks. The US attempted to carry out the policy enunciated in the American University speech. As he had stated in his press conference yesterday,3 there were areas of disagreement between our two countries, but he felt it was up to Mr. Khrushchev and him to do everything possible to prevent us from colliding. There were such questions as, for example, Laos where we hoped the USSR would exert its influence to prevent the situation from collapsing. Another matter of concern to us was of course Cuba. It was helpful that Soviet troops had been leaving, because this lessened the international importance of that problem. As had been stated before, the United States had no intention of invading Cuba. As to Germany, the President saw no reason why the situation there should be incendiary. He stressed incidents should be avoided in the corridors because they created unnecessary nuisance and irritation. Reverting to the American University speech, the President said it had been addressed more to the U.S. audience than to the Soviet, but we had tried to carry out that policy.



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series,USSR, Gromyko Talks. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved by the White House on October 21 and by S on October 16. The meeting was held at the White House. The Presidentʼs conversation with Gromyko was divided into 11 memoranda of conversation. The memorandum on disarmament is in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. VII, pp. 894-895. The memorandum on Cuba is ibid., vol. XI, pp. 875-877. The memorandum on Berlin is ibid., vol. XV, pp. 591-594. Memoranda of the conversations on the next steps after the Moscow treaty, a non-aggression pact, observation posts, military budgets, non-dissemination of nuclear weapons, and bombs in orbit are not printed. ( Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series,USSR, Gromyko Talks) For a memorandum of the conversation on US-USSR trade relations, see Document 364. A briefing memorandum for the conversation from Thompson to the President, dated October 8, is in Department of State, Central Files, POL US-USSR.

1 See Document 253.

2 See Document 328.

3 For a transcript of the Presidentʼs press conference on October 9, at which he had announced that the U.S. Government would not prohibit grain sales to the Soviet Union, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 767-775.





364. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, October 10, 1963, 4 p.m.

SUBJECT

US-USSR Trade Relations



PARTICIPANTS

US The President

The Secretary

Ambassador Thompson

Assistant Secretary Tyler

Mr. Akalovsky, ACDA/IR





USSR Foreign Minister Gromyko

Deputy Foreign Minister Semenov

Ambassador Dobrynin

Mr. Sukhodrev, Foreign Ministry





Mr. Gromyko then noted the Secretary and he had had earlier today a discussion on US-USSR trade relations.1

The President said we ought to give important study to this problem, noting that this could be useful particularly now that the wheat deal had been made. Perhaps chances for improvement in this area were now better than before. The President then asked the Secretary where this matter had been left with Mr. Gromyko.

The Secretary reported on his earlier conversation with Mr. Gromyko, noting that there were a number of problems, including operational, legislative, economic, and of course lend-lease.

The President inquired what the status of lend-lease was.

Ambassador Thompson said that in last discussions the USSR had offered to pay $300 million whereas the US wanted $800 million. This was apart from the 47 ships which the US had given to the USSR.

The President commented that the US had been looking at the problem of trade since the Moscow meeting, and that both sides should keep at it.

The Secretary then commented that as far as the US-USSR air agreement was concerned, the US thought technical discussions could be initiated looking forward to signing the agreement toward the end of the year. Those discussions were contemplated in the agreement but could be undertaken even before the actual signing. The FAA could discuss with its Soviet counterpart the operational rules and airport facilities, and our respective airlines could also discuss matters of concern to them. The Secretary commented that, frankly speaking, if there were headlines in the press tomorrow about the holding up of our Berlin convoys it would be very difficult if we signed the air agreement today.



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series,USSR, Gromyko Talks. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved by the White House on October 21 and by S on October 16. The meeting was held at the White House.

1 Document 362.





365. Editorial Note


On October 10, 1963, Soviet forces detained a U.S. convoy of 18 military vehicles at the Marienborn and later the Babelsberg checkpoints in the German Democratic Republic. Secretary of State Rusk told Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin in a meeting in Washington the next day that the action had been a “unilateral attempt by the Soviets to change well-established procedures” that set back “all the efforts we have been making to solve issues between us.” For text of the Departmentʼs report of the meeting in telegram 1155 to Moscow, October 11, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XV, page 594.

In a meeting with his senior advisers on October 11, President Kennedy decided on a course of action which included urging France and the United Kingdom to participate in assembling Free Style forces (a platoon-sized force to probe Soviet intentions on access) and in delivery of a tripartite protest note to the Soviets. For text of the record of action, see ibid., page 600. That afternoon Ambassador Kohler reported to the Department of State in telegram 1223 that he had met with Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Zorin, who argued that the Soviets had instituted no new procedures; rather, U.S. troops had refused to comply with established procedures. Zorin “stressed that Sov side had no intention create difficulties and that if this true of US side, all would be well.” Later the same day, Kennedy met again with his advisers and decided that assembly of Free Style forces should begin but appeared to take a wait-and-see stance on further action. For text of telegram 1223 and the memorandum of Kennedyʼs meeting, see ibid., pages 601-604.

Ambassador at Large Thompson and Dobrynin in Washington, Kohler and Zorin in Moscow, and Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko and Rusk held further discussions by telephone on October 11 and 12, with the Soviets arguing that the U.S. convoy had violated established procedures, while U.S. officials protested alleged Soviet violations. For records of their conversations, see ibid., pages 605-609. The convoy was allowed to proceed on October 12 without further incident.

In telegram Topol 481 to the U.S. Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, October 15, the Department expressed the opinion that the delay of the convoys did not mark a shift of Soviet policy “with respect Soviet efforts to secure general easing of international tensions.” The telegram continued, “we believe USSR did not intend to bring about major confrontation last week, and train events may have been set in motion by no higher ranking a person than Marienborn checkpoint commander,” who in turn was supported by higher level Soviet authorities who may not have been fully informed concerning U.S. convoy procedures. This interpretation, however, did not “absolve Moscow from responsibility for continuing Soviet efforts to erode Western rights in Berlin and on access routes.” For text, see ibid., pages 610-611. The President, in a meeting October 21 with key advisers, decided that the Soviet Union should be informed of U.S. convoy procedures and that the procedures “should be passed to Ambassador Dobrynin to give the Soviet political leadership rather than the military authorities control of the matter from the start.” A text of the memorandum for the record is ibid., page 615.





366. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, October 23, 1963.

SUBJECT

U.S. Wheat Sales to U.S.S.R.



PARTICIPANTS

(See attached list)



Following a brief exchange of pleasantries with Mr. Borisov, Under Secretary Ball suggested that this be considered a working luncheon in order to discuss questions of mutual interest to both sides. He stated that the President had approved licensing of wheat exports to the Soviet Union provided that certain conditions were met. In a press release, four main aspects of the wheat export deal were mentioned: (1) price, (2) terms of payment, (3) shipment, and (4) allocation as between private grain dealers. The matter of use was also of concern to the United States. Secretary Ball stated that Secretary of Agriculture Freeman would be able to discuss questions of price and Secretary of Commerce Hodges questions of shipment with the Soviet Delegation.

Mr. Borisov stated that in the Soviet Union there were really two foreign trade organizations, first, the Ministry of Foreign Trade and secondly, the State Committee of the Council of Foreign Ministers on Foreign Economic Relations. (At this point Mr. Manjulo interjected to the effect that there was a saying that while the Ministry made money, the Committee gave it away.) Mr. Ball said we did not have in this country an organization similar to theirs. We do not have a Ministry of Foreign Trade; matters pertaining to export of agricultural commodities are subject to the Department of Agriculture, questions of shipping to the Department of Commerce.

Mr. Borisov stated there were certain general and specific questions that arose. In a recent wheat deal with Canada similar questions were raised and were resolved very quickly and Mr. Borisov wanted to ask whether they could reach agreement on a basis similar to the Canadian deal. The “technology” of the Canadian deal was worked out by Mr. Sharp of the Canadian Ministry of Trade by means of an exchange of letters between Canadian and Soviet Ministries through the Wheat Board of Canada. The deal concerned not only wheat but also flour. On the basis of this exchange of letters the Soviet trade organization “Exportkhleb” concluded a general agreement with the Canadian Wheat Board. This general agreement covered the main points as to period of delivery, quantity, quality and also contained other provisions along the lines of the London contract or Winnipeg contract depending upon ports of shipment. The terms of payment that were worked out with the Canadians were F.O.B. Canadian ports, 25% cash down and then 25% every 6 months for a total period of 18 months, with a provision, however, that the total indebtedness at any time was not to exceed $200,000,000. Mr. Borisov stated that they had not used the privilege given them as to terms of payment because they considered the rates of interest charged them for the credit to be excessive. He said, “we are not poor but as good businessmen we simply did not want to pay additional expense of interest.” (Secretary Freeman interjected that this was a very sound capitalist attitude to the problem.) Following the conclusion of the agreement with the Canadian Wheat Board, Exportkhleb then entered into specific contracts with companies such as Dreyfus, Bunge, Continental and others.

The first general question then which arises is whether the Soviets could work out a similar technology of the deal with the United States. Mr. Ball thereupon stated that the U.S. considered it to be more practical to follow their usual procedures of trade, government participation in it being limited to the granting of export licenses while the actual agreements were to be worked out with individual grain dealers. The U.S. conducts an annual export trade of 800,000,000 bushels on that basis and would prefer to follow this method rather than develop a new procedure. Mr. Borisov asked whether the granting of licenses represented a guarantee of delivery of the quantities contracted for. The answer to that was given by Secretary Freeman who stated, no, the export licenses were not guarantees in any form, that contracts would have to be concluded with private companies, who would obligate themselves in accordance with normal international trade practice to deliver at a certain time at a certain price to a specific port. Mr. Borisov then said that here, then, was a problem which came up on their very first day in Washington. They did not have any normal international trade practice with the U.S.; Secretary Freeman said this might be the beginning of setting up such a practice.

Mr. Borisov then stated that a second general problem came up with reference to the question of price. In the case of the Canadian wheat deal the matter of price had already been negotiated with the Wheat Board of Canada and did not have to be negotiated with each individual supplier. The only thing that was negotiated with such suppliers was the amount of their commissions. Could such an arrangement be worked out here? Secretary Freeman said that this would not be possible in accordance with normal trade practice in the U.S.; that we did not have any organization similar to the Canadian Wheat Board and that we would prefer not to enter upon any government-to-government deals on matters of price and other terms of the wheat deal.

A discussion followed on the question of whether the very existence of the sizable Soviet demand would affect the world price of wheat. Mr. Borisov thought that speculators would take advantage of this situation and in his view, therefore, the most desirable thing would be in a fixing of the price. At Ambassador Thompsonʼs suggestion, Secretary Freeman pointed out that at the present time there were more than 1,100,000,000 bushels of wheat in storage in warehouses of the Commodity Credit Corporation, a government agency, and that such a speculation could not really take place since the government would make available to the grain market an amount of wheat corresponding to the quantity sold to the Soviets. Mr. Freeman also pointed out that by dealing directly with American grain dealers the Soviets would have the advantage of competition among the dealers and thereby would be able to obtain the best possible price in relation to the world price of wheat. Mr. Borisov said there was really no such thing as a world price of wheat, that there were only prices in a given market and therefore the Soviets, in addition to their other difficulties, would be faced with the choice of markets to buy in. Mr. Freeman added to Ambassador Thompsonʼs remarks by pointing out that the large quantity of wheat held by the Commodity Credit Corporation in itself represented, first, a guarantee of an adequate supply of wheat, far in excess of any quantity that had so far been mentioned and second, that, in a way, it represented a guarantee against upward fluctuation in the price of wheat. Mr. Borisov temporarily ended the discussion of the matter of price by saying that this was a question that certainly called for additional discussion, that this matter should not be permitted to “drift.” By that he did not necessarily have in mind a written agreement, rather something in the nature of a gentlemenʼs agreement.

Mr. Borisov next brought up the question of freight rates. Secretary Hodges said that one of the conditions of the Presidentʼs approval of the wheat deal was the provision that the wheat be carried on American ships to the extent that such ships were available at the time. Mr. Hodges further said that undoubtedly the Soviet Government knew that freight rates for U.S. shipping to Black Sea ports were some 3 to 4 dollars per ton higher than competitive freight rates in ships of foreign registry. He pointed out, however, that the Department of Commerce had set a ceiling on the freight rates to be charged for shipping wheat to the Soviet Union, that the setting of such ceiling had not as yet been publicly announced, but that the ceiling was still several dollars per ton higher than competitive freight rates of foreign carriers. In recent months foreign rates too had been gradually rising. He said the Soviets would have to deal with two types of U.S. carriers in this matter: first, small companies subsidized by the U.S. Government; to a much larger extent however with large U.S. carriers who were not subsidized, whose freight rates were still above competitive foreign freight rates.

Mr. Borisov said that the Soviets were not at all against American ships being used for the purpose of carrying the wheat but that they had no intention to pay anyone for “their blue eyes”. (Secretary Freeman pointed out that his eyes were brown.) Mr. Borisov further pointed out that his Ministry had recently purchased 9-1/2 million tons of wheat and that he had fully covered himself with provision for the tonnage necessary to carry this amount. Even prior to concluding the deal with Canada he had contracted for 60 vessels on a time charter basis, vessels of a capacity of 10 to 32,000 tons. In addition, Soviet ships were standing by to provide additional carrying capacity. Therefore, while the freight rates may be high, actually there was no business conducted on the basis of such rates. He suggested that the U.S. sell wheat to the Soviet Union on a F.O.B. basis; in such a case he would then ask for the right of Soviet vessels to call at American ports. This way any difficulty could be overcome. He also pointed out that just during the last 4 days freight rates from St. Lawrence ports to the Black Sea had dropped by 3 to 4 dollars per ton and were in the neighborhood of $9 a ton. This, then, too, was a general question which required further discussion and solution. Mr. Borisov brought up the matter of American ships sailing under so-called flags of convenience, for example, under the flags of Panama and Liberia. He said everyone knew this to be an extensive practice of American ship owners. Could such ships, not subject to high American freight rates, be used to carry the wheat to Soviet Baltic and Black Sea ports? Secretary Hodges answered that this was a possibility which would certainly have to be looked into.

Mr. Ball asked that the total quantity of wheat the Soviets were interested in be clarified. He said that initially a figure of 4,000,000 tons had been mentioned, that later that figure had been reduced to 2-1/2 million tons. Was he right in assuming that the negotiations at this time were concerned with 2-1/2 million tons? Mr. Borisov said he was certain that there would not be any need for future purchases of wheat since the present requirement had been brought about by a disastrous harvest in the Soviet Union which would not be repeated. Mr. Borisov said that the first figure had included the requirements of other socialist countries; however, since the President of the U.S. had declared that there would be no difficulty in supplying wheat to these other socialist countries directly, the figure was therefore revised to 2-1/2 million tons which represented the requirements of the Soviet Union. Mr. Borisov thought that trade representatives of Hungary, Poland and Czechoslovakia were already in the U.S. for the purpose of negotiating such purchases. Under Secretary Murphy asked whether this figure would include grain and flour or whether it was to be restricted to grain only. Mr. Borisov answered that the requirement was for grain only unless of course the U.S. were willing to sell flour to the Soviets for delivery to Cuba. Secretary Freeman and Under Secretary Ball answered this question in the negative.

Secretary Freeman, in summing up the discussion so far, gave his opinion that when Mr. Borisov opened direct negotiations with private grain dealers, the practical problems he had raised as to price, quantity and shipping might very well resolve themselves, that such private grain traders, driven by competition among themselves, would be far more efficient in negotiating and handling wheat deliveries than the government could hope to be. Mr. Borisov answered that he would not participate in any direct negotiations with private American grain dealers, that that was the function of Exportkhleb. Their negotiators, now in Canada, were headed by a Mr. Matveyev, that he would call them to Washington while he was still here, and that he would appreciate the State Departmentʼs instructing its Embassy in Ottawa to issue the necessary visas to that Delegation. He mentioned that one of the members of the delegation, “the most important member”, was a lawyer without whose say-so nothing could be accomplished.

This led to a few caustic remarks about lawyers in general on the part of Mr. Borisov, and to an anecdote concerning Peter the Great and lawyers by Mr. Ball.

With reference to the financial problems arising as a result of such large sales to the Soviet Union, Mr. Ball stated that he thought American private dealers might be faced with some difficulty in attempting to negotiate temporary financing or in attempting to discount papers with commercial banks, unless it was implied that the U.S. Government would guarantee payment to such commercial banks. The Export-Import Bank, a U.S. Government agency, would best be able to render such guarantees if, in its turn, it could have the guarantee of the Soviet Government in some form that payment would be made as agreed. Mr. Borisov stated that the Soviet Government could not guarantee such payments, that this would be handled by Soviet banking organizations; he was careful to make a distinction between the government-owned Soviet banks and the Soviet Government itself. It was pointed out again, however, that such matters would best be negotiated directly between the Soviet banks and the Export-Import Bank.

Replying to Mr. Ballʼs question as to the use of the wheat, Mr. Borisov stated that all of the wheat would be used in the Soviet Union.

Under Secretary Ball said that the American press had evidenced a great deal of interest in the wheat negotiations and he wondered whether he and the Soviet Delegation could agree as to what was to be said to the press at this point. Of course, the Soviets could say anything they wished. As for himself, he would merely say that a useful initial meeting had taken place, reviewing the questions to be discussed in detailed negotiations during the next 2 or 3 days, without, however, going into details. Mr. Borisov agreed.

Secretary Freeman, in conclusion, said that the next step would seem to be for Mr. Borisovʼs designees to begin negotiating the individual contracts with private concerns, and, as any problems arose which the U.S. Government could help resolve, then to turn to his Department and to Secretary Hodgesʼ Department for that purpose.

Secretary Hodges also stated that in negotiating for freight Mr. Borisov might find the problem to be less than it appeared at present. Mr. Borisov asked whether an export license would cover the entire period of grain shipments. Secretary Hodges replied that the license would cover the entire period provided that the criteria initially set up by the President had been met. He mentioned in passing that just this morning an export license had been granted for the shipment of corn to Hungary. Mr. Ball confirmed that the State Department would act as a coordinator directing the Soviet negotiators to the competent persons with whom specific problems were to be discussed.1

LIST OF PARTICIPANTS

United States George W. Ball, Under Secretary of State

Orville L. Freeman, Secretary of Agriculture

Luther H. Hodges, Secretary of Commerce

Charles S. Murphy, Under Secretary of Agriculture

John Bullitt, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury

Jack N. Behrman, Assistant Secretary of Commerce

Llewellyn E. Thompson, Ambassador at Large

G. Griffith Johnson, Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs





U.S.S.R. Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, Ambassador of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

Sergey A. Borisov, First Deputy Minister of Trade

Aleksey N. Manjulo, Chief, Administration for Trade with Western Countries, Ministry of Foreign Trade

Viktor M. Ivanov, Deputy Chief, Foreign Exchange Administration, Ministry of Foreign Trade

Nikolay I. Kuzminski, Chief, Interpretersʼ Section, Ministry of Foreign Trade

Eugeni S. Shershnev, Commercial Counselor, Embassy of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics





* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO-WHEAT US. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by the interpreter, William Krimer, and approved in U on October 30. The luncheon meeting was held in the James Madison Room at the Department of State.

1 At a second meeting on October 30 Borisov reported that his discussions with major U.S. grain traders had not produced any offers as the question of ocean freight could not be resolved and the dealers had been reluctant to commit themselves to specific prices without definite assurances that the sale would be made. (Memorandum of conversation; ibid.) At the third meeting on November 1 the two sides discussed further the higher cost of shipping grain in U.S. bottoms, and the Soviet delegation undertook to consider shipping 50 percent of the grain in them. (Memorandum of conversation; ibid.)





367. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, October 25, 1963.

USSR Marking Time on Berlin

Moscow is marking time on the Berlin autobahn issue and has given no indication as to how it would react to any joint Allied statement on existing access control procedures.

Since the detention of the British convoy on 16 October, the Allies have not sent any convoys in or out of West Berlin to which the Soviets could apply their new checking procedures. Last week, the Soviet checkpoint commander claimed that passengers in all convoys of five vehicles or more must dismount for head-counts. Following the perfunctory propaganda treatment of the 10-12 October US Berlin convoy incident, both Soviet and East German press media have ignored the subsequent British convoy incident.

Moscow appears anxious to avoid any impression that the autobahn incidents imply a Soviet retreat from the détente atmosphere. The USSR gave wide publicity to Gromykoʼs statement that a Western correspondent had distorted his remarks at Prestwich airport by applying his pessimistic assessment of prospects for disarmament to the whole range of issues covered in his recent talks with US and British leaders.1 Soviet reports of President Kennedyʼs 19 October speech2 highlighted his remarks on the improved international situation, and Izvestia also hailed the unanimous General Assembly resolution banning nuclear weapons from outer space as a “new important step toward further relaxation of tension.”

The Soviet leaders, however, served notice that their desire to further the East-West détente will not prevent a vigorous response to any Western moves which, in their view, might alter the status quo, particularly in Germany. ATASS statement of 21 October3 warned that renewed NATO discussions on establishing a multilateral nuclear force (MLF) will have an “adverse effect on the still infirm shoots of mutual understanding and trust.” It charged that steps to provide West Germany with access to nuclear weapons “contradict the spirit” of the test ban treaty. The statement repeated in notably restrained terms earlier warnings that the creation of the MLF will oblige Moscow to consider “the need to ensure the safety of the Soviet Union and its allies.”p



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Secret. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises p. 5 of the issue.

1 For text of the report in Pravda, October 20, see Current Digest of the Soviet Press, vol. XV, No. 42, November 13, 1963, p. 19.

2 For text of the Presidentʼs October 19 address at the University of Maine, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 795-797.

3 For text, see Current Digest of the Soviet Press, vol. XV, No. 42, November 13, 1963, p. 21.





368. Editorial Note


On November 4, 1963, Secretary of State Rusk called in Soviet Charge Kornienko to protest Soviet detention of another U.S. military convoy at the Marienborn checkpoint even though the convoy had followed U.S. procedures, about which, Rusk noted, the Soviet Government had been fully informed. In a discussion with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin on November 5, Rusk “expressed astonishment at Soviet action,” but Dobrynin “disclaimed any knowledge of incident.” The convoy was released about the same time the Rusk-Dobrynin discussion occurred. For text of telegrams 1344 and 1364 to Bonn, November 4 and 7, in which the Department of State reported on Ruskʼs two meetings, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XV, pages 620-621 and 623-624.

In a meeting with U.S. businessmen in Moscow on November 6, Chairman Khrushchev claimed that the Unites States had yielded to Soviet procedures and intimated that the incident might have led to nuclear war. For extracts from Khrushchevʼs comments, see The New York Times, November 7, 1963. In telegram 1735 from Bonn to the Department, November 7, Ambassador to Germany McGhee stated that Khrushchevʼs comments made “unmistakably clear that Autobahn convoy harassments receiving highest level attention in Moscow.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume XV, pages 624-626. In a memorandum to the President, November 7, Rusk and Secretary of Defense McNamara recommended “preparatory actions” that would permit retaliation by delaying transit of Soviet vessels through the Panama Canal. The memorandum noted, however, that the Department of State believed such a countermeasure had disadvantages, among them the fact that “the action involved is so far removed from the autobahn that it might be regarded by the Soviets as a sign of weakness.” For text, see ibid., pages 627-630.





369. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between President Kennedy and the Under Secretary of State (Ball)Source


Washington, November 5, 1963, 9:40 a.m.

JFK: Have we changed from 50-50 to 20% to 30% as the papers say?

GWB: No, not at all. Even what we talked with the Trade about yesterday was that we would get out some ground rules which would call for 50-50. Now if they canʼt find 50% within the guidelines then of course, it may turn out to be less than that.

JFK: I donʼt think it should look like we are doing—you know we have two stories in the paper this morning. One that we are dropping that thing to 20-30% after I said it would go on American bottoms and the other that we are giving this credit.

GWB: I feel just exactly as you do about it. The story that Bill Blair had in the Times on Sunday—I got wind of it late Sunday night from one of the wire services. I got a hold of Reston and he had Blair call me and I put it up to Blair and he said he got it from the tops of one of the Departments concerned or near the top and he is so near the top I canʼt believe the story is wrong. I said, it is wrong and I wanted to deny it. He said it had gone to bed in the first edition and Iʼll see if I can get a denial in the second edition.

JFK: What was the story?

GWB: It was a fairly detailed story of all the preliminary planning we've been doing and thatʼs where the 20-30% business got into it. Somebody …

JFK: Leaked it out.

GWB: Yes. Blair covers both Agriculture and Commerce so it was one of those places. He didnʼt come over here.

JFK: We donʼt want to be getting ourselves into more trouble than we need. Before it drops from 50-50 Iʼd like to be …

GWB: We're not going to do a thing to drop it from 50-50. As far as the Governmentʼs position is concerned, we are prepared to make a finding that not more than 50% can be carried in American vessels but then the guidelines are that up to 50% has to be carried in American vessels if they are available.

JFK: Will somebody support us by showing that our finding about available [ships] is not capricious?

GWB: Maritime claims they can document it completely.

JFK: We just donʼt have the ships.

GWB: The ships just donʼt exist because they are all occupied for the next six months.

JFK: The other part is this story on the credit—that we've changed that—that we've changed terms.

GWB: Thereʼs nothing in it. There is a lot of gossip going around in the trade and of course in the Departments there has been a certain amount of work going on. The Maritime Admin and the Agriculture Dept and people talk so much.

JFK: How are you proceeding on it in any case?

GWB: We're not going to touch the Russians until the autobahn thing is cleared up. They may come to see us today. The move is on their part now to come back with some reaction to what we gave them on Friday. I donʼt think we should be in communication at all with them until they get this thing cleared up cause we might want to break this.

JFK: Fine



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Telephone Conversations, USSR. No classification marking. No drafting information appears on the source text.





370. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, November 6, 1963.

SUBJECT

U.S. Sale of Wheat to U.S.S.R.



PARTICIPANTS

(See attached list)



Under Secretary Ball said that he and Ambassador Thompson were scheduled to go abroad late Friday and therefore would like to find out before their departure whether a reply to the proposal made at the last meeting1 had been received by Mr. Borisov from his government.

Mr. Borisov replied that he had reported the proposal to his government but had not as yet received an answer. The only additional information he had came from American newspapers.

Mr. Ball said that since their last conversation the other day, a number of possibilities had been explored. There was no U.S. Government agency which would be in a position to handle the wheat transaction in the manner proposed by Mr. Borisov. As Mr. Borisov undoubtedly knew, the grain export trade of the U.S. was handled by four large companies primarily, and in this case, too, it would be these four companies which would handle the bulk of the transaction, since it was difficult for smaller companies to handle a deal of this size. At the moment, the best way to proceed appeared to be for private American grain trading companies to make their proposals to the Soviet wheat delegation on a C & F basis. The government had already taken a number of steps, and intended to take some additional steps, in order to make it easier for the companies involved to make acceptable proposals to the Soviets on a C & F basis. A part of the movement of the wheat would still involve American vessels, but, since the offers to be made would be on a C & F basis, the freight would be a matter of concern to the American company only. Furthermore, since freight constituted only one element of their costs, competition among them for the volume the Soviets were interested in would tend to bring the C & F price down to a basis acceptable to the Soviets. Thus, instead of our saying to them that we proposed to sell them 2-1/2 million tons of wheat at a given price, for delivery during a specified period of time, the matter would be handled by private companies making individual C & F offers for delivery to Black Sea and Baltic ports.

Mr. Borisov asked a number of questions to clarify the proposal. They were answered by Mr. Ball by a restatement of the above provisions. Mr. Ball added that there was enough flexibility in this type of transaction for private grain dealers to be prepared to absorb some of the elements of costs involved.

Mr. Borisov asked whether his understanding that the price would be uniform, regardless of which ships would be used, was correct.

Mr. Ball answered that individual grain dealers would approach the delegation with specific orders. Company A might be higher than Company B. Mr. Borisov did not have to accept any offer which did not suit him. To Mr. Borisovʼs question as to whether the type of ships used would make any difference in price, Mr. Ball stated that he wanted to be clear about the fact that American vessels would be used along with vessels of other countries, that if a company were to negotiate the sale of, say, 1/2 million tons, the price for that quantity would be uniform since shipping costs would have been averaged out.

Mr. Manjulo asked whether the requirement that no company handled more than 25% of the total quantity involved, would still apply. This was answered by Mr. Ball in the affirmative.

Mr. Borisov said that it would have been better for him to deal with one firm only, but that he understood the situation. He went on to say that he thought the American market was somewhat different from that of other countries. In no other country did he have to settle commercial matters with a State Department or Ministry of Foreign Affairs. He thought that the State Department would have enough to do with problems of its own without getting involved in commercial matters. He wanted to clarify another question which pertained to Soviet ships. Supposing that agreement had been reached on the transaction under discussion, there would be other matters to be taken up as well, in which the question of discrimination would inevitably be brought up. What did the State Department intend to do about this problem?

Mr. Ball said that he had had at least four telephone conversations with the Secretary of Labor since last talking to Mr. Borisov, and had expressed to the Secretary the concern which the State Department felt in this matter.2 Any suggestion about Soviet ships not being handled in American ports was certainly not U.S. Government policy and this matter would also be taken up with the heads of the unions involved. As he had told Mr. Borisov the other day, in this country unions were independent, and while he felt that some progress would be achieved, the government could not give them instructions in this matter.

Ambassador Thompson remarked that some of these unions had also discriminated against American owners of ships sailing under flags of convenience. While the government would use its influence to alleviate this situation, it was not in a position to guarantee any specific results. At the present time there were four Canadian ships which had been struck in Chicago.

Mr. Borisov said that Soviet unions also were not subject to direct control by the Soviet Government. However, when necessary, their government did influence the unions to do that which was considered desirable by the government. Whenever the government sincerely desired to improve relations with a given country it took whatever measures were necessary to smooth out any difficulties, and vice versa, if they desired to worsen their relations with any given country, they took the appropriate measures for that purpose. Since their unions were independent, they, too, could create a problem by a policy of not handling ships of American registry. He thought that in such an event Mr. Ball would lose no time in summoning the Soviet Ambassador in order to register a resolute protest against such a policy. Todayʼs press again contained an article about Soviet ships with a statement that they would be picketed if they attempted to load wheat in this country. (Mr. Borisov handed Mr. Ball a clipping from an American newspaper.) In this connection the second question, then, was what would happen if he and Mr. Ball should come to terms, yet nothing could be accomplished because of such union policy.

Mr. Ball said that Mr. Borisov undoubtedly was aware of the fact that in recent years there were a number of instances when unions had struck rocket factories, nuclear plants, etc. yet the government found itself helpless to remedy this situation completely. The government was unhappy about the actions of some labor leaders but could not do much to improve the situation.

Mr. Borisov said that rocket factories and nuclear plants were, of course, internal matters, but, when unions began to interfere with the conduct of international relations, then it seemed to him that the State Department should be in a position to take action. Continuing, he said that he would report the present proposal to his government, and asked whether his understanding that the American firms were ready to do business was correct. When answered that this was so, he said that he would in that case detain the “Exportkhleb” negotiators whom he had just instructed to return home. He asked whether anything should be put in writing between the governments, perhaps something in the nature of an exchange of letters.

Ambassador Thompson thought it would be best for the present not to put anything in writing since the U.S. Government would be dealing with the trade and so would Mr. Borisov or his representative. He thought it would be best not to involve the government, as that might lead to a number of complications.

Mr. Borisov said that in the Canadian transaction, the Soviet Government had exchanged letters with the Canadian Minister, Mr. Sharp. Mr. Sharp had stated in the letter that Canada was prepared to sell a given quantity of wheat on specific terms. The Soviet Ministry of Foreign Trade acknowledged the receipt of that letter and signified its acceptance of the terms.

Mr. Ball thought we could give a letter to the Soviets to the effect that the U.S. Government was agreeable to the sale of wheat by private grain traders to the Soviet Union in large amounts, 2# million tons or more, and that the government would endeavor to see to it that the grain would be made available.

Mr. Borisov thought that in principle this was satisfactory, but would like to have one point added, a statement to the effect that the U.S. Government would, within the limits of its power and authority, facilitate the consummation of the transaction. He did not necessarily have the Department of State in mind for such a statement.

Mr. Ball said that Secretary Freeman could give the necessary assurances about grain being made available. The government would advise the trade of the broad condition of offers to be submitted and would take the necessary steps in order to facilitate the sale. As to delivery the government was not really competent. This would have to be handled by the private grain trading companies themselves.

(Mr. Manjulo brought up the matter of Soviet vessels again but was stopped by Mr. Borisov who told him that this should await further directives from Moscow.)

Ambassador Thompson said it was his frank view and opinion that the U.S. Government could influence the trade unions better if it were not known that an agreement existed. If the unions knew that agreement had been reached, they would undoubtedly create some additional difficulties.

Mr. Borisov said that he would of course keep any such letter confidential.

Mr. Ball added that he would have to consult with his associates as to exactly what kind of wording such a letter should contain, particularly in view of the fact that other Departments were involved.

Mr. Borisov wanted to reiterate the gist of the understanding. As he understood it then, first, private firms would make offers to the Soviet wheat delegation on a C & F basis; second, the government would see to it that the grain would be available on the market; third, that all possible assistance would be given to the private firms in the execution of this transaction.

When this was confirmed, Mr. Borisov said he would so report to his government.

Mr. Ball added that he hoped quick agreement could be reached because he and Ambassador Thompson would otherwise be forced to change some rather detailed plans they had made for their departure on Friday afternoon.

Pending Mr. Borisovʼs getting further instructions from Moscow, it was agreed that another meeting be held at 10:00 a.m. Friday in order to discuss commodities other than wheat which had been brought up at the first meeting.3

LIST OF PARTICIPANTS

United States Under Secretary of State George W. Ball

Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson

William Krimer, L/S, Interpreter





U.S.S.R. Sergey A. Borisov, First Deputy Minister of Foreign Trade

Viktor M. Manjulo, Chief, Administration for Trade with Western Countries, Ministry of Foreign Trade

Nikolay I. Kuzminski, Chief, Interpretersʼ Section, Ministry of Foreign Trade

Eugeni S. Shershnev, Commercial Counselor, Embassy of U.S.S.R.





* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO-WHEAT USSR. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Krimer and approved in U on November 15. The meeting was held in Ballʼs office.

1 See footnote 1, Document 366.

2 Memoranda of Ballʼs telephone conversations with Secretary of Labor Willard W. Wirtz are in the Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Telephone Conversations, USSR.

3 At 5:20 p.m. Ball called the President and told him that the Soviet delegation seemed to like the U.S. proposal. He made a similar call to Secretary Freeman. (Memorandum of telephone conversations; ibid.) At 11 a.m. November 7, the President convened an advisory meeting, attended by Ball and Freeman, to discuss the sale of wheat to the USSR. The discussion focused on rates, availablitity of U.S. tankers, and other issues involved in shipping the wheat. A tape recording of the discussion at the meeting is ibid., Presidentʼs Office Files, Presidential Recordings, Tapes 118/A55 and 118/A56.





371. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, November 8, 1963.

SUBJECT

U.S. Sale of Wheat to U.S.S.R.



PARTICIPANTS

(See attached list)



Under Secretary Ball asked if Mr. Borisov had received any reaction from Moscow with reference to the previous meeting.

Mr. Borisov answered that he had received a directive to confirm the arrangements and that, therefore, now practical business transactions could begin. He did have some minor items to clarify, pertaining to the exchange of letters.

Mr. Ball had prepared a draft which he wanted to show to Mr. Borisov and hoped this matter could be completed prior to his departure this afternoon. (The draft of the letter was interpreted to Mr. Borisov by Mr. Kuzminski.)1

Mr. Borisov said that on all principal matters the letter was acceptable, but that he would like to have two minor changes if possible, though he would not insist on them. Where the quantity was stated to be 2-1/2 million tons he would prefer to have it read “2-1/2 million tons or more.”

Amb. Thompson said that a definite figure was used in order to be able to comply with the requirement that no dealer handle more than one-fourth of the total quantity.

It was agreed to change the wording to read “approximately” 2-1/2 million tons.

A second amendment requested by Mr. Borisov was an extension of the period of shipment to May 31 instead of April 30.

Assistant Secretary Johnson thought there might be some conflict there with reference to the price support legislation which expired May 15.

Mr. Borisov mentioned that at one of the previous meetings Mr. Roosevelt2 had proposed extension of delivery time in order to get into the period of lower freight rates. Mr. Borisov had consulted with his foreign trade organization which had agreed to such a change.

Mr. Ball thought this would be agreeable.

As to the rest of the letter Mr. Borisov asked permission to think it over, though in principle it was “O.K.” He went on to say that inasmuch as the wheat question had been resolved, trading firms should now be informed to that effect. At the Embassy reception yesterday he had talked with representatives of several firms who had had no further information beyond the original directive.

Mr. Ball replied that there remained some details to be worked out between the government and private firms in order to keep the price to a minimum. He had not wanted to give any further advice to private trading firms until after having heard from Mr. Borisov this morning. These instructions would now be released.

Ambassador Dobrynin asked how long this might take and was answered by Mr. Ball and Ambassador Thompson that this would be done very quickly and it was agreed, therefore, that the wheat question could be considered to be completed.

Mr. Ball asked Ambassador Thompson to comment on the broader problems of trade between our two countries.

Ambassador Thompson said that he thought Mr. Borisov was familiar with the principal problem pertaining to increased trade between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. It was primarily a question of credit and was subject to the provisions of Congressional legislation, such as the Johnson Act. This in turn was related to the outstanding Lend-Lease balances. The last time that a discussion had been held with Soviet representatives, two conditions for a settlement of the Lend-Lease balances were laid down by the Soviet side: first, the extension of government credit from the Government of the U.S. to the Soviet Union and second, the conclusion of a trade agreement extending most favored nation treatment to the Soviet Union. In view of the fact that the U.S. Government, as such, was not in a position to extend long term loans to other countries, we had never really been able to conclude negotiations even though there was some indication that we could agree on the amount of the outstanding Lend-Lease balances. As to long term credit, the U.S. Government took the position that this was a matter for private concerns to negotiate, provided that the Lend-Lease matter had been settled. Mr. Ball interjected that this, of course, did not exclude the possibility of the government guaranteeing credit extended by private firms to the Soviet trading organization. Ambassador Thompson continued by asking whether Mr. Borisov was prepared to discuss a broader settlement of outstanding trade problems or whether he wanted to deal with individual specific commodities.

Mr. Borisov said that the Soviet Union was ready to negotiate on the broader basis. The head of his government, Mr. Khrushchev, had repeatedly said this in many of his statements. He had emphasized that he was of the opinion that the development of trade leads to the establishment of good relations between countries and that, therefore, such trade should be encouraged. Mr. Borisov thought he really did not need to say this, since all present knew this very well. He was sure they also knew that the establishment of good relations between the Soviet Union and the United States was a fundamental condition of world-wide peace. The Soviet Union was therefore ready to negotiate on a very broad basis. In this connection, a number of questions arose. One such question was whether the U.S. was prepared to cease discriminatory treatment of Soviet commodities, Soviet vessels in American ports and prohibition of certain trade transactions.

Regardless of whether a trade agreement were concluded, such discrimination would have to be discontinued, for, as long as it existed, it was difficult to expand trade. Perhaps some of these discriminatory measures and practices came about as a result of the Cuban situation, but he knew that there were many reasonable people in the U.S. Government and that therefore ways and means to do away with these practices could be found. He had meant to say this in the way of a preamble.

Mr. Ball wanted Mr. Borisov to know that from the point of view of the U.S. Government we were dealing here with three distinct kinds of problems: (1) Congressional legislation, (2) administrative regulations, and (3) the unionsʼ strong position with reference to Soviet shipping. With reference to the first problem, there was no American legislation which hindered expanded trade with the Soviet Union. As to the second type of problem there were only some administrative regulations connected with Public Law 480. (Mr. Chayes added that there were also some regulations pertaining to port security and inspection requirements.) The PL 480 program merely stated that the U.S. Government could not charter ships of nations engaged in trade with Cuba for PL 480 grain shipments. But this only affected the U.S. Government itself, not private companies. (Mr. Chayes introduced a slight correction by recalling that there were certain legislative provisions in the AID bill prohibiting military or economic assistance to countries engaged in the Cuban trade.) Thus, Mr. Ball continued, we come to the problem which we have discussed in previous meetings, namely, the unionsʼ attitude towards loading Soviet and other Eastern European vessels. We had two distinct sets of longshoremensʼ unions in this country: the unions on the Pacific Coast, whose leadership was quite independent of the East Coast and Gulf Coast unions, did not adopt the same strong position towards Soviet and Eastern European shipping, as did the latter. However, even with the East Coast and Gulf unions, this attitude was only their position at this moment. It did not mean that it was permanent and could not be altered. In the last few days, Mr. Ball had had several conversations with the Secretary of Labor, who would try to persuade union leadership to change their position. It should be understood, though, that the Secretary of Labor was not always successful in his attempts at persuasion. Thus, for example, persuasion had failed with reference to the four Canadian vessels which had been struck in Chicago, and the government was now seeking court injunctions to solve that problem. Mr. Ball thought that the shipping difficulties could eventually be worked out if a broader trade agreement were negotiated.

Mr. Borisov pointed out that shipping was only one of the problems. Supposing that the shipping problem had been solved, there still remained the problem of a boycott of Soviet commodities. American firms had been refused licenses for Soviet commodities, and even if a firm succeeded in purchasing Soviet goods, it would still be handicapped. As an example, he cited the fact that in order to import Soviet chromium ore it had been necessary to obtain State Department assistance. He understood, however, that the ore had been unloaded in an East Coast port where the unionsʼ attitude was particularly reactionary. The State Department had been successful enough to influence the unions; about 150,000 tons of the ore had been unloaded and paid for, and the transaction had been completed quite normally. He therefore came to the conclusion that when the U.S. Government was willing to exert its influence it could do so successfully.

Mr. Ball said that he would wish he could share Mr. Borisovʼs hopeful attitude. In some cases the government could, by exerting great efforts, achieve some success. In others again, it could not. But again, he wanted to emphasize that this was the kind of problem which tended to disappear once normal trade relations had been established.

Mr. Borisov said that he had a specific proposal to make and that was to negotiate either a renewal of the old trade agreement which had been discontinued in 1947 or a new one, to be negotiated in Moscow or Washington.

Mr. Ball thought we would be interested in exploring the possibilities of concluding a broad kind of trade agreement.

Amb. Thompson said he did not think it would be useful to either side to be unrealistic as to the practical problems of Congressional attitudes to any trade agreement with the Soviet Union. Such Congressional attitude would be governed by overall relations between the two countries. It was therefore necessary to take steps to develop a climate which would tend to remove such obstacles. He did not think it was possible to remove them in a single step.

Mr. Borisov agreed that he did not think it possible to settle all problems overnight. The question therefore, was what initial steps the U.S. Government was prepared to take in order to develop broader trade. For the Soviet side he could say that they were prepared to place large orders in the U.S. His foreign trade organizations were even now placing large orders for a variety of equipment in Western European countries. Mr. Ball and Ambassador Thompson surely knew that the Soviet Union was in the process of developing a chemical industry. For the time being, they were primarily interested in chemical fertilizer plants. They were prepared as a first step, to place an order for such a plant in this country, but wanted to know what steps the U.S. Government could take to facilitate such a transaction. Mr. Borisov thought this to be a realistic approach to the problem of developing broader trade.

Mr. Ball said that we would be interested in exploring such possibilities.

Mr. Borisov continued to the effect that if this were really possible, he would be prepared to conduct negotiations for that purpose. He wanted to remind Mr. Ball that recently the two countries had exchanged delegations of specialists for the purpose of studying trade problems. The American delegation to the U.S.S.R. headed by Mr. Ernest Rubin of the Department of Commerce had visited ports and other cities in the Soviet Union and had met with many organizations. Their delegation, headed by Mr. Alkhimov had been here. The delegation included the head of a chemical fertilizer association, a Mr. Glintsev. He had sounded out American firms with reference to the sale of a fertilizer plant. The firms had appeared to be interested, but were unanimous in saying that they had not had any directive from “above”. Mr. Borisov proposed to send another group of fertilizer plant specialists if this appeared to be promising.

Mr. Ball thought this would be the best way to get started.

Ambassador Thompson said that two problems presented themselves in this connection. First, the question of licensing would have to be discussed with other Departments. Second, and more important, was the question of payment terms and credit and this was precisely the area where we would encounter problems under the Johnson Act. The Johnson Act, however, only concerned long term credit but did not affect normal commercial credit of 180 days or less.

Mr. Borisov said that in Europe and in Japan the Soviet Union had obtained terms long enough to permit the setting up and developing of production of such plants, that is 6 to 7 years. Supposing that Mr. Glintsev were to come here for the purpose of starting negotiations, and that we could come to terms on all questions including technical, commercial and other questions, what measures would the U.S. Government be prepared to take with reference to Soviet goods?

Mr. Ball thought a suggestion from the U.S.S.R. as to the type of commodities they would be prepared to offer to the U.S. would be of interest.

Mr. Borisov said that it was clear that the question of boycott of Soviet goods would still have to be resolved. Would licenses be granted so as not to boycott Soviet commodities? As to the actual items of merchandise this would be up to the commercial people such as Mr. Shershnev and others, and up to American purchasers.

Mr. Ball said that there were no boycott provisions in any of the legislation of the U.S. The only legal question to be decided was whether most favored nation terms could be extended to the Soviet Union. To clarify, historically, following the passing of the Tariff Act of 1932, a series of negotiations with various countries had led to reciprocal agreements for the reduction of tariffs with many Western European countries. The question of whether such most favored nation treatment could be extended to trade between a country whose private citizens conducted foreign trade and a country where foreign trade was handled on a state basis was something that had to be considered. Congress had repeatedly taken the position that countries with whom over the years negotiations which had led to mutual concessions, had been conducted, were entitled to lower tariffs. They had earned it. But Congress was not prepared to extend most favored nation treatment to other countries, which had not made such concessions. In any case, to the extent that a trade agreement could be negotiated with the Soviet Union the question of tariffs was not too important. He thought that many things which the Soviet Union wanted to export would be either free of duty or would be subject to very low duty only, such as for example, chromium ore. It is for this reason that a list of the commodities would be of interest to us, so that the problem could be studied in its specifics.

Mr. Borisov said that at a previous conversation he had already explained that it was not the Soviet Government itself which did the buying or selling but the foreign trade monopoly which had been established in 1918. It has been this way since then, it is this way now, and they did not intend to change this situation. Purchases abroad were made by an All-Union trade association, which had its own budget, and was responsible for its own activity. This provision was in the charter of the association. It seemed to Mr. Borisov that Americans were not too well informed as to what had happened with reference to Soviet foreign trade within the last two years. A new tariff had been established which contained two primary categories. Very low duties, or none at all, applied to countries which had a trade agreement with the Soviet Union. Higher duties applied to countries which had no trade agreement. Therefore, their foreign trade organizations always had to calculate where it would be more advantageous to buy, taking the tariffs into consideration. For example, a trade agreement with the Federal Republic of Germany provided for very low tariffs. Since no trade agreement with the United States was in existence, higher tariffs applied. The foreign currency department of the Ministry of Foreign Trade supervised all transactions to make sure that purchases were made where this was most advantageous. He therefore thought our Congress, too, was not too familiar with actual conditions in the Soviet Union. In a conversation between Chairman Khrushchev and Secretary Rusk the question of buying in the U.S. had been raised and answered by Mr. Khrushchev that the Soviet Union would buy American goods if they were competitive. When Mr. Borisov said that, as a first step, he was prepared to buy chemical equipment in the U.S., he did not mean that he was prepared to pay a higher price than usual or that he would absorb the higher duty, since the foreign trade association was not permitted to overpay, and in its turn to over-charge its customer organizations. He was sure, therefore, that Mr. Ball would understand this was not a matter of solving problems for him only, but also presented problems to be solved by the U.S.

Mr. Ball said that we would be interested in exploring this matter further, for the present perhaps between Ambassador Thompson and Ambassador Dobrynin.

Mr. Borisov wanted to clarify another question. In a discussion between Ambassador Thompson and Ambassador Dobrynin the question of patents and licenses had been raised. He did not quite understand the place of this problem in the discussion of broadening trade.

Mr. Ball said that he had in mind some concern for the protection of technology in the sale of equipment and plants to the Soviet Union. When an American company sold to a Western European country, it would not expect that such European country would take this technology, copy it and then sell it to others in competition with the American firmʼs products. We were interested in working out this problem. If we were to sell plants and equipment to the Soviet Union we would not want the Soviet Union to reproduce identical equipment and sell it in Western Europe, or even to reproduce the same equipment for use within the Soviet Union.

Mr. Borisov said that obviously there were many cases when American and Soviet inventions were made quite independently of each other and differed in minor details only.

Mr. Kennedy remarked that such similarity presented a problem even where major problems of patent protection and licensing had been solved, that it was this major problem we were dealing with.

Mr. Borisov agreed, but said that this was usually handled by means of special clauses in contracts concluded between seller and buyer. Such clauses did not, of course, provide that the final products of plant and equipment purchased could not be sold abroad.

Mr. Ball did not think this problem presented too many difficulties.

Mr. Chayes said that, in fact, we had studied Soviet law and its provisions for the protection of technology. He felt that in recent years, from our point of view, acceptable arrangements for the protection and licensing of technology had been adopted.

Ambassador Thompson thought the Soviets would find it easier to buy here if they were members of the world-wide patent union.

Mr. Kennedy said that the U.S. was a member of two major international patent organizations.

Mr. Borisov did not think that this matter should be the subject of intergovernmental agreement but should be provided for in each specific case, by means of special clauses in the contract. It appeared to him that this was more a problem of conversation than actual difficulty or danger. The Soviet Union fulfilled its obligations. Moreover, two years ago a special foreign trade organization section dealing with patents and licenses had been set up in order to protect not only foreign patents in the U.S.S.R., but also Soviet patents abroad.

Mr. Shershnev added that the Soviet Union had begun registering its patents in the U.S., as well as American patents in the U.S.S.R.

Mr. Borisov concluded this subject by stating that he felt patents should not present any great problem. As for the last question raised by Ambassador Thompson, with reference to Lend-Lease, the point of view of the Soviet Government was the same as during the last conversation conducted by Ambassador Menshikov in 1960. He would repeat that point of view: the Soviet Union could reach agreement on the settlement of Lend-Lease payments but on the same two conditions—(1) that a trade agreement be concluded and (2) that the question of credit be resolved. Did he understand Ambassador Thompson correctly to the effect that the credit question could be resolved in an overall Lend-Lease settlement?

Ambassador Thompson said that in previous conversations the Soviet Union had always spoken in terms of U.S. Government credits. This was not practical, but once a settlement of the Lend-Lease claims had been achieved, any American firm would be in a position to extend normal commercial terms to the Soviet Union, in some cases possibly with a U.S. Government guarantee.

Mr. Borisov wanted to clarify why he had raised the question of credit. Actually, any significant volume of trade with the U.S. had been discontinued long ago. It was evident that the Soviet Union would have practical difficulties, though he emphasized that this would not be impossible, to pay all at once for everything that it wanted to buy in the U.S. Therefore, it would be necessary to begin rehabilitating their relations with American firms. During the past seven to ten years the Soviet Union had purchased capital equipment on the world market on credit terms. Assuming that the trade agreement could be concluded once again, it would be primarily concerned with purchases of capital equipment. The Soviet Union would want to obtain the same terms here as were available elsewhere. Being exporters of capital equipment themselves, they too sold on credit, for if they did not do so, no one would buy from them. It was a well-known fact that in developing countries American and Western firms were competing with the Soviet Union in selling equipment, and it was natural that whoever sold for less and on better terms got the business. Therefore, their interest in credit was quite logical. Actually, it did not mean the introduction of anything new into international trade. This, then, was the Soviet proposal on a settlement of outstanding Lend-Lease claims.

Mr. Ball thought that this offered a basis for serious discussions. For the present, such talks would perhaps be best conducted between Ambassador Thompson and Ambassador Dobrynin, to see if something could be worked out, that could subsequently be formalized in Moscow or in Washington.

Mr. Borisov said that he would have no objection to such discussions and assumed that Ambassador Dobrynin would not object to them either although, should another convoy be detained in Germany, the Ambassador might be out of circulation for two or three days.

Mr. Ball said that the government would take the necessary steps to get the grain trade active with a view to producing specific offers to the Soviet wheat delegation.

The Soviet group took a few minutes to consult among themselves with reference to Mr. Ballʼs draft of the letter mentioned earlier, and, following the changes suggested there, the meeting was concluded.

LIST OF PARTICIPANTS

United States Under Secretary of State George W. Ball

Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson

Assistant Secretary of State G. Griffith Johnson

Abram Chayes, Legal Advisor

William Krimer, L/S, Interpreter





U.S.S.R. Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador

Sergey A. Borisov, First Deputy Minister of Foreign Trade

Viktor M. Manjulo, Chief, Administration for Trade with Western Countries, Ministry of Foreign Trade

Eugeni S. Shershnev, Commercial Counselor, Embassy of U.S.S.R.

Nikolay I. Kuzminski, Chief, Interpretersʼ Section, Ministry of Foreign Trade





* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO-WHEAT 17 USSR-US. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Krimer. The meeting was held in Ballʼs office.

1 The draft has not been found. The final text reads:

“In confirmation of the conversations we have had during the last few days, the United States Government is prepared to prescribe licensing conditions which will enable the United States grain trade to offer approximately 2-1/2 million tons of wheat for delivery to the Soviet Union on a CAF basis prior to May 31, 1964.

“The appropriate Departments and Agencies of the United States Government are prepared to take such steps as are within their competence to facilitate the execution of these transactions. I should be glad of your confirmation that the Soviet Union desires to purchase wheat of approximately this amount provided it is available at reasonable prices in relation to the world market.” (Ibid.)

A copy of Borisovʼs confirming letter, also dated November 8, is attached to Ballʼs letter.



2 Under Secretary of Commerce, Franklin D. Roosevelt, Jr.





372. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet UnionSource


Washington, November 12, 1963, 7:35 p.m.

1544. Tyler called in Dobrynin November 12 to discuss Barghoorn arrest.1 Said he was sure Dobrynin could appreciate concern in American intellectual community and Congress over arrest. Felt he must tell Dobrynin this event cannot but have an injurious and damaging effect on mutual efforts expand and improve relations in cultural, scientific, and educational fields. Said he felt very strongly only way to minimize such damage would be immediately to release Professor Barghoorn. Tyler said the immediate purpose his demarche was to associate himself strongly with efforts of our Consul in Moscow, which so far unavailing to be put in touch with Barghoorn.

Tyler stressed that US Government attached very great importance to this. He concluded by saying he felt it in interests both countries to minimize and reduce very strong feeling which arrest had created in this country.

Dobrynin said he had thus far received only bare information concerning arrest and would report conversation to his government. Went on to say that Soviet authorities must have had strong evidence against Barghoorn to have taken such strong action as arrest.

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, PS 7-1 US-USSR. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Guthrie and approved by Tyler.

1 On October 31 Frederick Barghoorn, a Yale University professor who had arrived in the Soviet Union on October 7, was arrested by Soviet authorities and held incommunicado until the Soviet Foreign Ministry informed the U.S. Embassy of his detention on November 12.





373. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, November 13, 1963, noon.

1629. Eyes only Secretary and McGeorge Bundy. Arrest of Professor Barghoorn. Appreciate instructions and discretion authorized Deptel 1545, Nov 12.1 It seemed to me point would be more effectively made if we served warning on blocking group and Soviet Govt on reaction this unwarranted arrest in United States and inevitable repercussions affecting groupʼs visit, thus putting bee on them.

Counselor for Cultural Affairs Staples accordingly reached Mamedova, organizer of group, ten minutes before she was to leave for airport, and had following conversation:

“I said I was calling under personal instructions from Amb. I said we informed by MID that distinguished American Professor, Frederick Barghoorn, arrested on charges of espionage. I said I wished warn Mrs. Mamedova that American reaction to this unjustifiable arrest is very strong at very high level in both official and private circles. I said this is bound have serious effect on her groupʼs visit. I said that if they intend to go in face of this circumstance they must expect unfavorable reception.

“Mamedova said, ‘This is terrible news. What is his name?’ She said she had not heard anything about this, that her group ‘is very far from all these things.’

“‘We must find out what happened,’ she said. ‘I donʼt know what I can do but whatever we can do we shall try. There cannot be of course any connection between a public organization and government action in a case like this.’

“I said her group was high-level group with obvious influence and that I brought this matter to their attention on official instructions.”

Minister Stoessel has just returned from FonOff, where he saw head American section. He protested Barghoornʼs arrest in strongest terms, stressing great concern in official and academic circles in U.S. over this action against eminent scholar. Stoessel said it was fantastic to link man of Barghoornʼs stature with espionage and noted adverse effect this would have on our relations, mentioning specifically impact on reception of Mamedova group along similar terms as expressed by Staples.

Smirnovsky reiterated Barghoorn arrested as spy; fact that he prominent scholar made his espionage activities even more unfortunate. He said could not accept any link between Barghoorn arrest and Mamedova group. Latter going U.S. with view to improving relations between our countries, whereas Barghoorn was spy working against good relations.

Smirnovsky said could give no details re alleged espionage activities of Barghoorn: “Investigation is still continuing.” He agreed pass on Stoesselʼs request that Consular Officer be permitted see Barghoorn, and made no comment to Stoesselʼs observation that apparent 12-day delay in informing us of arrest was unjustifiable.

I have requested urgent appointment see Gromyko.

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, PS 7-1 US-USSR. Secret; Immediate.

1 Dated November 12 and transmitted at 9:01 p.m. (ibid., PS 7-1 US-USSR Barghoorn), it informed the Embassy in Moscow that the President was “greatly concerned” about Barghoornʼs arrest and that he had authorized Kohler to withhold or invalidate the visas for a Soviet exchanges group about to leave for the United States.





374. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, November 14, 1963, 1 p.m.

1642. Eyes only for McGeorge Bundy. I am gratified that the President plans to make statement on Barghoorn case in his press conf today1 and I welcome opportunity to offer some suggestions on line he might take in terms maximum possible impact on Sov as well as world audience.

My own view is that action against Barghoorn by Sov security authorities has undoubtedly disturbed Sov intellectual community and possibly also those elements of Sov bureaucracy which are not primarily concerned with internal security considerations. It is apposite to point out that when making my demarche yesterday to Foreign Office I had distinct impression that Zorin, despite his past role as Soviet “hatchet man” was embarrassed and such views as he expressed on Barghoorn case seemed to me to lack usual conviction which has characterized defense by Foreign Office spokesmen in similar circumstances in past. Smirnovsky, head of USA section who attended Zorin, was clearly uncomfortable and appeared downcast throughout session.2

While having of course no direct evidence of their attitude, I am certain that many Sov intellectuals and particularly elements of Sov academic community are deeply upset by Barghoornʼs arrest and implications it may have for continued active interchange with Western opposite numbers, although, of course, we must recognize that it would be impolitic, if not dangerous, for them so to indicate to us or other Western contacts.

I believe these considerations should be borne in mind in our handling of Barghoorn case and any public statements we may make with regard to his arrest. The expressed reaction of the American academic community is thus a particularly useful peg on which to hang any public statement, and I would think it desirable for the President amply to exploit the message from Yale University. The tone and emphasis of the Yale statement in my view is exactly right, and it was for this reason, of course, that I used it in my démarche to Zorin.

Naturally the President will wish to supplement his reference to the consternation and shock of the American academic community at Barghoornʼs arrest by a reiteration of his own strong personal conviction that the arrest is wholly unwarranted and unjustified along lines set forth in your message to me yesterday.

Further, in any prepared statement the President should plan I would think it advisable to stress his personal concern that the Sovs took an inordinately long time (at least 12 days) to notify the Embassy of Barghoornʼs arrest and are continuing to deny access to him by appropriate American officials and that this behavior is in contravention of established international norms with regard to protection of nationals. I would suggest that the formal statement made by the President be on this note.

Finally I would think it useful if the President would avoid any specific threats of reprisal since this might set in motion irreversible trends seriously restricting the maneuverability in policy which is vital, it seems to me, in the present context of our relationships with the Soviet Union. The President, however, should be prepared to deal with inevitable questions with regard to the effect of Barghoornʼs arrest on pending negotiations. In this connection I would suggest that he respond along the following lines: 1. If the President should be asked (as we are being asked in Moscow by local American correspondents) what bearing Barghoornʼs arrest may have on the tentative agreement to begin negotiations for the renewal of the Cultural Exchange Agreement, now tentatively scheduled November 15, he might express the view that so long as the Soviet Government persists in detaining Barghoorn on grotesque and unwarranted charges it would be inappropriate if not impossible to discuss with the Soviets continuation of exchange arrangements with which such action by the Soviet Government is totally incompatible. He could add that the exchange agreement envisages, among other things, the development of wide contacts between American and Soviet scholars in all fields and Soviet Governmentʼs action against Barghoorn raises apprehensions as to how it intends to treat legitimate American scholars in the pursuit of legitimate lines of inquiry. Naturally he would wish in this connection to point out that the exchange negotiations do not involve the US Government alone but require the cooperation and active participation of significant segments of the American society, particularly the academic community. An exchange agreement cannot be implemented nor can it be satisfactorily negotiated without the full cooperation of such elements.

2. If the President should be questioned on the effect of Barghoornʼs arrest on continuation of the Consular Convention negotiations, he might state that the issue of protection of nationals is one of the most vital points under discussion with the Soviets in these negotiations. United States negotiators have made it clear and will continue to stress that inordinate delay in notification to American Consular Officials of the arrest of an American national is unacceptable as well as denial of access to him by such officials. In this connection the President will undoubtedly wish to underline the creditable US record on these points with regard to recent clear cases of Soviet espionage against United States.





One final suggestion which I hesitate to put in too positive terms since I recognize that domestic considerations and other requirements may dictate the course of action. With this reservation, I would think it advisable for the President to avoid identifying the Barghoorn case as obvious reprisal for Ivanovʼs arrest.3 He could field any such question along this line by simply saying he, like many others, is frequently unable to fathom the motives for Soviet behavior.4

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, PS 7-1 US-USSR Barghoorn. Confidential; Flash.

1 On November 13 Bundy had asked Kohler for his views on the line the President should take on Barghoornʼs arrest at his press conference on November 14. (Telegram 1559 to Moscow; ibid.)

2 Kohler reported on his meeting with Zorin at 4:45 p.m. on November 13 in telegram 1638 from Moscow. In the meeting Kohler expressed the “grave concern” of the President and Secretary of State at the arrest of Barghoorn and read Zorin parts of a telegram that he had from the President of Yale. (Ibid.)

3 I.A. Ivanov, an Amtorg employee who had been arrested in New York in October for espionage.

4 For a transcript of the Presidentʼs press conference on November 14, during which he made a statement along the lines suggested by Kohler, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 845-853.





375. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, November 14, 1963, 3:30 p.m.

Thursday a.m., November 14, Secretary Hodges received telephone request from Soviet Embassy that he see Borisov on that day concerning wheat transaction. Secretary Hodges agreed to appointment for that afternoon at 3:30 p.m.

Prior to meeting, Secretary Hodges notified State and Agriculture Departments of meeting and invited them to have representative present. Notice of meeting was also given to Mr. Bundy of White House staff.

Meeting with Borisov convened in Secretary Hodgesʼ office at 3:30 p.m. Acting Maritime Administrator Giles and Assistant Secretary of State Johnson were present. Under Secretary Murphy (Agriculture) could not attend due to conflicting appointment. Under Secretaries Ball and Roosevelt were out of the city.

Borisov was accompanied by his interpreter who had been with him on previous meetings at State Department and by three others of his regular group (names not obtained).

Borisov opened conversation by saying he wanted to buy wheat but American traders apparently did not want to sell wheat; that he had received offers on only small quantities and that transportation charges were much above world prices. He wondered if the United States Government could not do something.

Secretary Hodges responded that he did not know why American traders may be offering to sell only small quantities of the proposed 2-1/2 million tons; that it may be due to fact they were waiting for official release of information on shipping guidelines and export licenses which were being made public that day.

Borisov then referred to high American shipping rates; that he understood from his last conversation with Under Secretary Ball that American shipping would be available at reasonable rates in relation to world prices; that this meant shipping at world rates; that Mr. Ball had indicated the U.S. Government would be able to make arrangements about shipping, etc. Borisov referred to copy of Under Secretary Ballʼs letter of November 8th.1

Secretary Hodges responded that he was not present at his conversations with the State Department, and Assistant Secretary Kennedy would have to speak to that.

Mr. Kennedy replied to Borisov that Mr. Ball had not said American shipping rates would be the same as foreign rates but that on a C and F basis, with no more than 50% American vessels used, the difference between American and foreign rates would narrow, that foreign rates could be expected to go up and any difference in the delivered prices on the total transaction would not be significant. Mr. Kennedy said the “arrangements” by the U.S. Government Mr. Ball referred to meant the publication of the export control bulletin and the shipping rate guidelines. Mr. Kennedy also reminded Borisov that present U.S. wheat price is some 6 cents per bushel below the Canadian price and this meant the U.S. Government was really helping to hold down the “world price” on wheat.

Secretary Hodges said to Borisov he wanted to emphasize that U.S. shipping rates are higher than foreign rates because of higher American wages and costs. Secretary Hodges said, you will have to pay higher rates on shipping in American vessels. There is no way to get around that, and will be no way. The Secretary reminded Borisov that he had told him on the occasion of their first meeting upon arrival in this country that rates on American vessels are higher.

Acting Maritime Administrator Giles pointed out that the U.S. Government had taken important steps to resolve the shipping problem on a fair basis. That initially it was understood and agreed 100% of the wheat would go on American vessels. This had been reduced to 50%. That in addition rate guidelines for the larger vessels had been reduced 20% over the strong objection of shipping industry people. That a spokesman had strongly criticized the Administration earlier this week. (This was Max Harrison, president of the American Maritime Association in speech to the AFL-CIO Convention.) Thus, the U.S. Government had met the Soviet Government more than half way in an effort to resolve the shipping rate matter.

Secretary Hodges again mentioned the current difference between the Canadian and U.S. prices on wheat, with current U.S. price more than $2.00 per ton below the Canadian price on comparable grade.

At various points Borisov commented to effect that the matter of U.S. costs and arrangements on shipping was an internal matter for the U.S., that the Soviet Government could not subsidize U.S. shipping but that the U.S. could do so if it wished.

The conversations ended with Borisov asking the Secretary to do what he could in finding out about the market situation and bringing about the best situation. The Secretary stated he could not set prices, that was done by the buyer and seller but he would do the best he could in finding out why American traders are not offering to sell in large quantities and do what he could generally to be helpful. Borisov responded by saying he did not ask for anymore than the Secretaryʼs best.

The conference ended at approximately 4:50 p.m.

Further notes by writer of this memorandum

Prior to the conference with Borisov it was learned through Maritime Administration sources that the Soviets had received an offer from Continental of 200,000 tons of wheat at $81.50 per ton, ($15.50 for shipping) and had received an offer from a small trader (Kerr) of 30,000 tons at $79.50 ($13.50 for shipping). Both of these offers were turned down by the Soviets. Borisov did not mention having an offer of $79.50 per ton delivered to Odessa.

On Friday morning Giles exchanged information and views with Under Secretary Murphy, and also reported developments by phone to Under Secretary Roosevelt who was then in Richmond.

There was further exchange of information and views between Secretary Hodges and Under Secretary Murphy Friday about 2:30 p.m. Mr. Murphy had learned from grain sources the Soviets had a contract form prepared and would ask next week for best offers on 650,000 tons of wheat for delivery each month during January, February, March and April. Through Maritime Administration, received information that this week the grain people had stopped asking for shipping quotations, that no one was looking for tonnage for the Soviets because the Soviets had turned down what seemed to be reasonable offers. The shipping broker (by the name of Najor) said he had been in direct contact with the Soviets Thursday evening and they told him they could pay no more than $12.00 for shipping. They also told him they were awaiting further instructions from Moscow. Najor reported he had also heard the Soviets had “put pressure” on the Hungarians for buying American wheat at too high prices.

Secretary Hodges decided Friday afternoon in conversation with Under Secretary Roosevelt (who had just returned) and Giles that he (Secretary Hodges) should not initiate any follow-up contact with Borisov at this time.

Robert E. Giles2



* * *



* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series,USSR, USSR & Satellites Grain Sales. Confidential. Drafted by Giles on November 15.

1 See footnote 1, Document 371.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.





376. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, November 16, 1963, 1 p.m.

1679. Gromyko summoned me to MFA 12 noon today to inform me of Sov Govt decision, on personal intercession Khrushchev, to expel Barghoorn from USSR, probably today. Action by Sov Govt, Gromyko said reading from prepared statement, was in response deep concern expressed by President. He stressed Barghoorn clearly guilty of espionage as evidenced by documents found on his person and by his own deposition.

Gromyko voiced expectation on behalfSov Govt that US Govt would take steps immediately release Ivanov. Finally, he pointed out if any US official should attempt publicly justify Barghoornʼs conduct and thus cast doubt on Sov action against him Sovs would publish results investigation.

Gromyko said MFA would be in touch later today with Consular Section re details release Barghoorn. In response my inquiry, he confirmed Sovs would make brief announcement of release to press this evening and indicated no objection our doing likewise. Accordingly, Emb plans inform local American correspondents later today, preferably after firm word on release time received. Emb intends limit remarks to press to brief statement Sov Govt had decided release Barghoorn in recognition Presidentʼs expressed concern at his arrest and will decline further comment.

Full text Gromykoʼs statement follows immediately.1

Stoessel



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, PS 7-1 US-USSR Barghoorn. Confidential; Flash. Repeated to London.

1 Transmitted in telegram 1680, November 16. (Ibid.)





377. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, November 21, 1963.

SUBJECT

Recent developments in relations with the Soviet Union



PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, USSR

Llewellyn E. Thompson, Ambassador-at-Large, Department of State



On the occasion of the Soviet Ambassadorʼs call today, I remarked that recent developments in our relations had not been good. He said he was quite concerned about this and said he was sure that in Moscow they were at a loss to understand what was happening. He mentioned recent public speeches, the furor about the Barghoorn case and the autobahn incidents, Mr. Ballʼs trip,1 and the wheat deal. He said that as he had little time today, he would like to have me around soon for a longer talk about these matters. I observed that with respect to speeches, that he should keep in mind that when Government officials talk about how strong we were in the military field, this had a relationship to our efforts to keep down the military budget. He said he could understand this but such speeches had different interpretations elsewhere, including Moscow.

The Ambassador said he was certain that his Government would be baffled by the fact that we had begun discussions about improving trade with the Soviet Union and the fact that immediately thereafter Mr. Ball had gone to Europe and according to press reports had endeavored to cut back Western trade with the Soviet Union. On this point I said I could categorically tell him that the newspaper reports were quite wrong and I said that some of them had undoubtedly been deliberately put out by people with a special interest to serve. I said that speaking quite frankly we were not ourselves concerned in any competitive way about credits to the Soviet Union because of our own legal restrictions. I said that on the other hand, from the point of view of the Western Alliance, we did not think it wise for the Western countries to get into a credit war with each other to see who could give the Soviet Union the longest credit. I pointed out that such developments affected the relations of our Allies with each other and it was this aspect that was of particular concern to us. I said that, moreover, Mr. Ball had not gone to Europe to deal with this question and it was only a minor item on a long agenda. Moreover, I referred to the fact that there were some standard procedures about credit to which most of the Western countries adhered, and that these applied not only to the Soviet Union, but to all other countries. I pointed out that as a country with the largest reservoir of credit, the United States might stand to gain from a competitive point of view if these practices were changed, but we did not believe that this was in the overall Western interest. When he said he understood, nevertheless, that we had tried to reduce the present trade practices of the West with the Soviet Union and to reduce this trade, I said I could assure him categorically that this was not the case.

With respect to the wheat deal, he said that he had not been in on all of the conversations but from the last one he himself had believed that we had agreed to make arrangements so that the Soviets could buy wheat at, or very nearly at, world prices. He said Borisov had so reported to the Soviet Government. He said that Borisov had no authority to go even one dollar over world prices, that he had reported recent developments to his Government, and he did not know what the answer would be.2 I said that I could see that there was some ground for some misunderstanding but, on the other hand, it was quite clear from the whole tenor of the negotiations that we had not agreed to meet world prices as they defined them, including shipping. I pointed out that Mr. Ball had said specifically that we would not subsidize American shipping to meet the Soviet desires, and that he had said merely that he hoped the arrangements we were making would bring the eventual prices offered reasonably close to world prices.3



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL US-USSR. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Thompson and approved in S/AL on November 21.

1 Under Secretary Ball visited Europe in mid-November for conversations on economic and trade questions. In London on November 15 he held an extensive discussion with Board of Trade and Foreign Office officials about the differences between the British and U.S. attitudes toward the extension of long-term credits to the Soviet Union. (Telegram 2391 from London, November 15; ibid., Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2339)

2 Following the meeting with Secretary Hodges (see Document 375), Borisov had met with Thompson on November 19 and complained about the higher cost of U.S. wheat and the requirement for 50-50 shipping. Borisov ended the discussion by saying the Soviet Union was willing to buy U.S. wheat, but that it was out of the question to pay more than world prices. (Memorandum of conversation, November 19; Department of State, Central Files, INCO-WHEAT US)

3 On November 20 the President had called Thompson to ask whether he should send Khrushchev a note thanking him for interceding on the Barghoorn case. Thompson demurred and said he would raise it with Dobrynin. (Memorandum of conversation, November 20; ibid., PS 7-1 US-USSR Barghoorn) Following the conversation printed here, Thompson expressed the Presidentʼs appreciation to Dobrynin. (Memorandum of conversation, November 21; ibid., S/AL Files: Lot 67 D 2, Thompson Memoranda of Conversation)





378. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, November 23, 1963, 2 p.m.

1759. Khrushchev, accompanied by Gromyko, Smirnovsky (Head USA Section), Teplov (Acting Protocol Chief) signed book of condolences at Spaso House 12:30 local time today.1 I had previously been informed by Smirnovsky who called personally at Emb, that Khrushchev would sign book and accordingly, I was on hand to meet him.

In private conversation which followed signing ceremony, Khrushchev expressed his deep personal regret and shock at death of President Kennedy for whom, he said, he had great admiration and respect; indicated he and his family had sent messages of condolence to Mrs. Kennedy; and advised that as measure respect and esteem, Mikoyan would leave for US tomorrow to attend funeral as official Sov Govt representative. Khrushchev added that while he did not know President Johnson personally, he felt sure new President shared late Presidentʼs views and hoped he would have opportunity meet and exchange views with him in future.

I made appropriate reply to Khrushchev, including expression of personal gratitude that he had chosen personally register his esteem for late President by signing book of condolences.

Smirnovsky indicated Mikoyanʼs passport would be sent Emb today for visaing and presumably Emb will then learn and report Mikoyanʼs precise travel plans.

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15-1 US/Kennedy. Limited Official Use; Immediate.

1 For President Kennedy, who was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, November 22.





379. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Thompson) to Secretary of State RuskSource


Washington, November 24, 1963.

SUBJECT

Conversation with Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, USSR, Sunday, November 24, 1963



The Ambassador asked to see me today for what he called a personal conversation, most of which related to the arrangements for Mr. Mikoyanʼs visit.1

He raised the question of Mr. Mikoyan seeing the President, and I told him what the tentative arrangements were. He asked about the Presidentʼs views on foreign affairs, and I pointed out how closely the new President had followed these matters and been kept informed by President Kennedy. I expressed the opinion that, in general, President Johnson would continue the broad policies established by President Kennedy, and drew his attention to the fact that President Johnson had assisted in the formulation of these policies. I said that naturally the new President would have a different style of operation, and I suspected would devote a larger proportion of his time to domestic affairs.

The Ambassador inquired about the relationship of the Attorney General to the new President, and I said I understood that they had worked well and closely together. I said that President Johnson had already expressed his intention to keep most of the Administration intact.

The Ambassador observed that the new President had traveled broadly and was obviously well informed about foreign affairs.

When the Ambassador pressed me for personal advice on Mr. Mikoyanʼs visit, I said that he would probably be invited to speak on television and that my personal view was that this was not a good time for him to do so regardless of what he said. The Ambassador seemed to agree with this point of view.

I also said that the new President would need time to settle into office, and that I personally thought that Mr. Mikoyan would be well advised not to stay for a long period in Washington on this visit. I pointed out that the public had been highly aroused by the assassination of President Kennedy, that in any country there were crackpots, and it was always possible that there could be unpleasant incidents such as demonstrations which would not be good for either country. The Ambassador also seemed to agree with this judgment.

At the end of our conversation, the Ambassador asked if President Johnson was informed about the private correspondence between President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev. I said that I was not sure that the new President had seen all of the exchanges, but assumed that any that he had missed would be brought to his attention if they were of current significance.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 USSR. Secret. Initialed by Rusk and Thompson. Copies were sent to Ball and Bundy.

1 Mikoyan was visiting Washington for the funeral of President Kennedy.





380. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, November 26, 1963, 11:35 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

US The President

Under Secretary Harriman

Ambassador Thompson

Mr. Tyler—EUR

Mr. Bundy—The White House

Mr. Akalovsky—ACDA/IR





USSR Mr. Mikoyan

Ambassador Dobrynin

Mr. Smirnovski, Chief of the American Section, Foreign Ministry

Mr. Sukhodrev





SUBJECT

Call by Mr. Mikoyan on the President



During a brief exchange of amenities while pictures were being taken, the President handed Mr. Mikoyan a personal message for Mr. Khrushchev in response to the latterʼs published letter.1

Mr. Mikoyan opened the conversation by saying that before leaving Moscow Mr. Khrushchev and he had talked about Mr. Khrushchevʼs meeting with the President, then a Senator, at the Senate Foreign Relations Committee during Mr. Khrushchevʼs visit to the US in 1959. Mr. Khrushchev recalled that the President had asked him some questions at that meeting and that the President and Senator Fulbright had seen him to his car when he was leaving. The President had then told him, with a touch of American humor, that he should become a US Senator and that he would make an outstanding one. Mr. Khrushchev had replied that each of them should work in his own parliament and fight for peace. Mr. Mikoyan continued that he remembered the press reporting at that time that in Mr. Kennedyʼs view the meeting with the Foreign Relations Committee had gone well and that Mr. Khrushchev was a strong man who was well able to defend his point of view. Thus, even at that time there had been some contact and a beginning of mutual understanding between the President and Mr. Khrushchev. As he had said earlier, Mr. Khrushchev and he had talked about this before his departure from Moscow.

Mr. Mikoyan then said that on the basis of his own meetings in Moscow he thought contacts could be maintained and mutual understanding brought about.

The President responded that the leaders of our two countries would be a failure in the history of the world if they were unable to find an answer to how the two sides could live together peacefully and beneficially in the world. This was the big challenge of our times. President Kennedy and Mr. Khrushchev had seemed to be making, with their respective leaders, some advances in that direction. The only really important thing was what was the answer and how we could do it, because if we could find an answer, the world would be indeed a much better place to live. The United States was earnestly seeking friendship and cooperation with all nations of the world. The United States did not seek hostility with anyone; it courted no territory and was not seeking domination of any people. The President went on to say that President Kennedyʼs foremost thought every day had been what steps could be taken on that particular day to bring about a better understanding between the peoples of the world. The President said this policy had been fully embraced by him and would be respected and continued. The United States would meet anyone more than half way.

The President then noted that the United States was not planning to invade Cuba, but that the Cuban problem was a very serious one with our people. He hoped that as days came and went we would be able to find a solution there which would make it possible to lead our peoples further towards peace and understanding. Actions already taken had gone part of the way and some lessening of tension had taken place. We had a number of problems at home which were quite troublesome, and if there was any indication at any time that we could in some way bring about better understanding and better relations we would go our part of the way. We were dedicated to our system and intended to preserve it, but this did not mean that we wanted it to dominate or enslave any other people.

Mr. Mikoyan said he was happy to hear these words uttered by the new President of the United States. The Presidentʼs desire to live in peace and friendship with the USSR and with other nations was in full accord with the views of the Soviet Union.

The President stated that there would be no change in the Kennedy policy. We were very happy that Congress had shown evidences of approving negotiations and exchanges of views between President Kennedy and Mr. Khrushchev. This had offered us real encouragement not only in their attitude but also in our peopleʼs attitude. Our constant purpose, each day, would be to seek to travel the road of peace and to find solutions to many problems that engaged the two sides and to many differences existing between them.

The President continued that as an immediate comment he wished to say that the problem which was the biggest with our people was the result of the Castro-promoted subversion. This inevitably and invariably gave us strained relations. He hoped, however, that in future both sides would find that they had moved further to peace and had made gains greater than even those made by his predecessor and Mr. Khrushchev.

Mr. Mikoyan said he was very much gratified to hear this. However, there was only one point he wished to comment on, namely, the Presidentʼs remark concerning Cuban subversive activities. He said he could not understand how a small nation like Cuba could subvert anyone, let alone a big power. On the contrary, the whole world could see how small Cuba was being subverted by a number of various, well-financed organizations. The Soviet Union believed that all subversive activities should be ended everywhere. He asserted that he knew Cuba did not want to subvert anyone. In his conversation with Castro, the latter had told him that he wanted good relations with the United States. In his statement on the occasion of the tragedy falling upon the United States, Castro had shown himself as a great humanitarian as he had voiced deep regret about President Kennedyʼs death. Therefore, Mr. Mikoyan continued, he wished to ask the President not to accept the allegations which were sometimes mentioned in the press. He wanted the President to believe him that good relations with Cuba were in the interest of the United States.

The President responded that his intention had been simply to give an evaluation of the feelings of our people and of what gave them problems. He said he had spoken sincerely and earnestly about US intentions with respect to Cuba. We had no plans for invasion, and we believed that there was no justification for Cuba to invade others by subversion or otherwise. The President reiterated that what he was seeking now was merely to give Mr. Mikoyan an evaluation and expressed the hope that better understanding could flow from this.

The President then thanked Mr. Mikoyan for his coming to Washington to honor and to pay tribute to the late President by his presence. He said he looked forward to further meetings and exchanges of views of this kind and hoped that they would be fruitful.

Mr. Mikoyan concluded the conversation by noting that he knew the President was very busy today and that he did not wish to take any more of the Presidentʼs time. However, he wished to add just one comment of a personal nature, and note that he had turned 68 yesterday, while here in Washington. He said he trusted that further meetings would take place, including meetings with Mr. Khrushchev, and that those meetings would be fruitful.

The meeting ended at 12:30 p.m.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL US-USSR. Secret. Drafted by Akalovsky and approved by S/AL on November 27 and by the White House on December 2. For a memorandum of another part of the conversation, see Document 381. The meeting was held at the White House.

1 Khrushchevʼs letter of condolence, November 24, and the Presidentʼs reply are in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. VI, pp. 311-313.





381. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, November 26, 1963, 11:35 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

US The President

Under Secretary Harriman

Ambassador Thompson

Mr. Tyler—EUR

Mr. Bundy—The White House

Mr. Akalovsky—ACDA/IR





USSR Mr. Mikoyan

Ambassador Dobrynin

Mr. Smirnovski, Chief of the American Section, Foreign Ministry

Mr. Sukhodrev





SUBJECT

Communications between the President and Mr. Khrushchev



In response to the Presidentʼs remarks about the peaceful intentions of the United States, Mr. Mikoyan said that instead of setting forth the Soviet views on these matters he wished to hand the President a message for him from Mr. Khrushchev. He then asked Mr. Sukhodrev to read the text of the message in English.1

The President said he appreciated the message very much and noted that we would certainly continue the policy of exchange of information and free communication. He observed that when he had been a little boy he had been told that no manʼs judgment on any question was better than his information on that particular question. Of course, information could come only from communication. He hoped that Mr. Mikoyan would convey to Mr. Khrushchev that he was looking forward to communicating freely with him. This could be done by means of letters, provided, of course, that they remained private. In this connection, he assumed that Mr. Khrushchevʼs and his own letters already exchanged were not for publication.

Mr. Mikoyan assured the President that if it was agreed that the exchange be private there would be no leaks anywhere as far as the Soviet Union was concerned. The system at the top of the Soviet Government was such as to preclude the possibility of any leaks. He also wished to point out that as far as the Soviet Ambassador in Washington was concerned, the President could be absolutely sure that he would not allow any leaks. Consequently, if the President wished to communicate with Mr. Khrushchev through the Ambassador, he could be assured that no one in Washington, except the Ambassador himself, would be familiar with the communication. As to Moscow, only Mr. Khrushchev himself and his closest associates would have the knowledge of the message.

The President said that he wished to give the same assurances on our part.

Mr. Mikoyan commented that he realized even without this the exchanges would be private.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. Secret. Drafted by Akalovsky. For a memorandum of the first part of the conversation, see Document 380. The meeting was held at the White House.

1 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. VI, pp. 311-313.





382. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet UnionSource


Washington, November 26, 1963, 7:14 p.m.

1674. Mikoyan with Dobrynin and Smirnovsky called on Secretary afternoon November 26 for 80-minute conversation.1 Following based on uncleared memcon:

Secretary stressed continuity of US policy. US intends continue seek opportunities improve international relations and prospects for peace. Mikoyan replied pleasant hear these convincing words. He had favorable impression President Johnson and way he intends carry on. Thought useful to convey his impressions to Khrushchev and other leaders USSR.

Secretary said despite our differences and method of approach to problems, important that we explore all possibilities where areas of common interests might be found even though formal agreements could not be concluded. Cited as example arms race and expressed wish find some way this could be dampened and expenditures lessened even without formal agreement.

Secretary mentioned non-dissemination as one area where our two Governments had common interest in preventing non-nuclear powers obtaining nuclear weapons or nuclear capability. Much of remaining time was taken by Mikoyan in arguing against MLF along standard Soviet lines. Secretary explained in forceful terms MLF would not involve transfer of nuclear weapons to Germans or any other nation. Asked Soviets to wait until details on MLF known. This would convince them that no transfer involved. Mikoyan did agree that two Governments had common interest in non-dissemination.

Conversation concluded with Secretary saying on bilateral matters that we would go ahead with Consular Convention and exchanges negotiations, would be in touch on civil aviation and hoped to improve trade, though this was more difficult. As regards broader international questions, Secretary would be consulting with our Allies in December and perhaps after the New Year would be in position to discuss them.

Rusk



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 US-USSR. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted and approved by Davis and cleared with Thompson.

1 A copy of the 10-page memorandum of conversation is ibid., POL US-USSR.





383. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource


Moscow, December 3, 1963, 2 p.m.

1824. In course my meeting with Gromyko today, which I had requested for purpose discussing pending bilateral issues (e.g., Civil Air Agreement, leased line, Consular Convention), FonMin briefly and in general terms touched on desirability of progress toward relaxation of tensions. Gromyko said he had in mind need for action on broad issues which he had discussed with Secy and late President when in Washington last fall.1 He had noted statement by Pres Johnson that new administration intended to follow foreign policy lines laid down by Pres Kennedy2 and he hoped, therefore, Washington would soon come up with specific suggestions for further steps. Sovs, for their part, Gromyko said, were prepared to move ahead.

I said I understood Secy had discussed problem with Mikoyan3 when latter in Washington for Pres Kennedyʼs funeral and had underlined need for continued consultation with allies on issues of multilateral concern. I reminded Gromyko that there would be further opportunities for such consultation at upcoming NATO Ministerial Meeting as well as during planned visits to Washington after first of year by leaders of certain of our allies.

Gromyko commented wryly that he hoped in such consultations we planned to search for keys to solutions rather than provide additional locks. He then said if he were asked to name problem requiring most urgent solution, he would be obliged to cite problem of Germany.

I said I readily agreed that German problem was of cardinal importance but, unfortunately, our suggestions for its solution were widely disparate. In any case, I could assure Gromyko that we were equally anxious to seek and settle on ways of relaxing tension but we did feel at moment best chances of quick progress toward this goal lay in bilateral field.

Gromyko concluded the discussion by remarking that while avoiding a worsening of international situation is better than worsening it, best course is to take positive steps for improvement by removing current blocks. I said that was precisely purpose of my visit today.4

Kohler



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 US-USSR. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to London, Paris, Bonn, and Berlin.

1 See Documents 362-364.

2 For President Johnsonʼs address to Congress, November 27, during which this statement was made, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1963-64, Book I, pp. 8-10.

3 See Document 382.

4 Kohler also discussed the forthcoming visit to the Soviet Union of FAA Administrator Halaby, communication problems for the U.S. Embassy, the cultural exchanges agreement, and the consular convention. (Telegrams 1822 and 1823 from Moscow, December 3; Department of State, Central Files, ORG 7 FAA and EDX 4 US-USSR)





384. Editorial Note


On December 5, 1963, President Johnson held his first National Security Council meeting. The topic was “Soviet Military Capabilities.” Following a briefing by Director of Central Intelligence McCone, the President asked Secretary of State Rusk to comment. According to the summary record of the meeting, Rusk “emphasized that despite the problems which the Soviet Union is having in the economic field, and despite our nuclear superiority, the Russians are making a tremendous effort. We cannot reduce our effort in any way—military, space, economic assistance, etc. We have a full agenda ahead of us. We should concentrate on those factors which make people pull the nuclear trigger. We should be ready to explore agreements with the Soviets which are based on our current military strength.” Secretary of Defense McNamara then commented on the relative military strength of the United States and the Soviet Union, noting that during the 1960s “our advantage over the USSR in the nuclear area will not fall below two times.” For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, volume VIII, pages 543-544.





385. Letter From the Ambassador to the Soviet Union (Kohler) to the Ambassador at Large (Thompson)Source


Moscow, December 10, 1963.

Dear Tommy: So much has happened since the autobahn impasse and the post midnight calls to me in Cornwall last month that it all defies review or appropriate comment—November 7 and the Time-Life group, Freddie Barghoornʼs ordeal, the devastating assassination of President Kennedy, the encouraging start of President Johnson. So instead of reviewing the past, Iʼll just move toward the future.

I greatly appreciate your letters of November 29 and particularly the enclosures to the second.1 As you well know, these are indispensable to the intelligent conduct of our business here and I shall of course handle them and any future exchange with appropriate caution.

I have been giving considerable thought—as I'm sure you and others in Washington have—to the question of how we may best continue the dialogue between ourselves and the Soviets. I was glad that in his talk with Mikoyan2 President Johnson subscribed to the desirability of maintaining the tradition of private exchanges with Khrushchev and that in his letter the Chairman also endorsed the idea.3 While this is useful, I feel strongly that if this medium has been valuable in the past it was precisely because it had its origin in a personal confrontation between the two principals. This is a missing element now, and just as I felt nearly three years ago—a feeling you shared—that there should be an early meeting between President Kennedy and Khrushchev, so do I now feel that such a meeting would be useful for the new President.

There seems little question that Khrushchev would welcome the idea. In his remarks to me at Spaso when he signed the book of condolences,4 he referred several times to the usefulness of Vienna in his relationship with President Kennedy and he pointedly remarked on his lack of knowledge of the successor. He makes a similar point in his letter to President Johnson.

I have just read the Presidentʼs statement about traveling abroad.5 Despite this, I would hope he also would see merit in an early meeting. I'm sure he recognizes the advantages of personal confrontation over correspondence and the advice of even the best experts in taking the measure of a principal adversary. Beyond this, there is, it seems to me, a sound tactical reason for early agreement on the idea of a meeting. Khrushchev, given his personal modus operandi and the imperatives of communist dynamics, must at some point test the will and determination of his new adversary. While we canʼt avoid this, we can and should, I think, make an effort to postpone the test until the new administration has time to shake down a bit. With a meeting in the offing, I doubt if Khrushchev would attempt an early showdown.

On timing, I would think a meeting should follow the upcoming round of talks with Allied leaders and well precede the Party Conventions. March or April would seem the most suitable time—certainly not later than May. If a NATO spring summit is in the cards, as I have heard suggested, I would think a meeting with Khrushchev before rather than after would be preferable to avoid an impression that the President was in a position to negotiate on behalf of the alliance or even to act as its spokesman. Perhaps it would be desirable to schedule a meeting with Khrushchev just prior to a NATO summit to permit the President to report directly to his colleagues on the return trip.

As far as we can tell, this timing would fit Khrushchevʼs schedule; his only announced activity which he would find it difficult to rearrange is his June trip to Scandinavia.

On the site, I suppose an obvious requirement is that the meeting take place on neutral soil. There have been rumors about Stockholm as a suitable spot; I would not think this desirable because of Khrushchevʼs plans to visit there on his Scandinavian swing. I would opt for Vienna or some city in Switzerland.

One more thought. Despite the lack of positive reaction, the Soviets have not abandoned their idea of an ENDC summit in Moscow. While recent treatment has been in low key, the proposal has been kept alive by occasional references in the press, the most recent being in the joint communiqué following Novotnyʼs visit. The prospect of a private meeting with the President would almost certainly abate any enthusiasm Khrushchev may have for an eighteen-nation summit and would relieve any pressure there may be from neutral quarters for the idea.

Finally, a hooker. On the record, Khrushchev is committed to visit Cuba sometime this winter. We have heard little about this lately and the idea may have been abandoned in view of Castroʼs failure to sign the Test Ban Treaty and of his general wavering between Moscow and Peiping. Such a visit would clearly be absolutely incompatible with any meeting with President Johnson, at least before our election next fall. Consequently, if there should be a tendency toward a US-USSR meeting in the reasonably near future, this consideration should be put forward to Khrushchev frankly and firmly. I believe he is enough of a realist to get and accept the point.

For obvious reasons, I felt it unwise to surface these ideas in a formal message from the Embassy, but felt they should be put forward to you—and through you to the Secretary and any others with whom you may think they should be shared. I should, of course, appreciate your own informal reactions to the foregoing and your own thoughts on the subject.

Sincerely,

Foy



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL US-USSR. Top Secret; Eyes Only.

1 The second letter transmitted copies of Khrushchevʼs November 24 letter to Johnson and the latterʼs reply; see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. VI, pp. 311-313. The other letter has not been identified further.

2 See Documents 380 and 381.

3 See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. VI, pp. 311-313.

4 See Document 378.

5 For a transcript of the Presidentʼs press conference on December 12 during which he stated that he would not be traveling abroad, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1963-64, Book I, pp. 34-38.





386. Current Intelligence Weekly ReviewSource


Washington, December 13, 1963.

Moscow Shifts Tactics in Struggle With Peiping

Having failed to rally sufficient support among foreign parties for a new international Communist conference to condemn the Chinese, the Soviet leaders now seem to be preparing for a protracted stalemate in the conflict. They have reverted to a position set forth by Khrushchev at the East German party congress last January, when he appealed for “tolerance and patience,” a cessation of polemics, and a pause to give the adversaries a “chance to calm down” before convening a conference.1

Two authoritative Pravda articles on 27 November and 6 December commemorating the anniversaries of the 1957 and 1960 Moscow meetings renewed Khrushchevʼs appeals, avoided direct assaults on the Chinese, and reiterated his dictum that “time will determine which point of view is correct.”

In view of the strong resistance within the Communist movement to any Soviet attempt to force a showdown, which almost certainly would result in a formal and avowed rupture, the Soviet leaders apparently see no alternative to accepting another pause, during which they will pursue less provocative and risky efforts to isolate the Chinese and prove that Peiping is solely responsible for continuation of the conflict.

Moscow is maintaining a virtual suspension of anti-Chinese propaganda. The Pravda article of 6 December piously warned against “overdramatizing” the situation and regarding it as “irreparable.” It recalled Khrushchevʼs appeals in January and October for a cessation of polemics and proposed discussions within the “normal channel of inter-party relations,” which would create “more favorable conditions” for a new world Communist meeting. There are no indications, however, that the Russians expect either a resumption of bilateral talks or an international conference in the near future. The Soviet ambassador in Peiping told the British charge on 2 December that the Chinese had not suggested resumption and that no meeting was planned in Peiping or elsewhere.

Although the Chinese have not directly commented on the new Soviet appeal, they have made it clear that they have no intention of accom modating the Russians. On 10 December, Peiping repeated its charge that “anti-China propaganda” in the Soviet press has exposed the “hypocrisy and ulterior motives behind the CPSU leadersʼ so-called call for a halt to open polemics.” Whereas Moscow ignored the defiant tactics of the Chinese delegation at the recent World Peace Council session in Warsaw, Peiping played up the clashes and denounced the USSR for “stage-managing an anti-China scandal.”

Peiping has also continued its series of long articles attacking the July exposition of Soviet positions. The sixth, published simultaneously in Peopleʼs Daily and Red Flag on 12 December, juxtaposes Khrushchevʼs revisionist views of “peaceful coexistence” with the correct Leninist line followed by the Chinese. There does not appear to be anything new in the Chinese argumentation on this question, but the article maintains the Chinese insistence that Khrushchev is evil incarnate.



* * *



* Source: Central Intelligence Agency: Job 79-S01060A. Confidential; No Foreign Dissem. Prepared by CIAʼs Office of Current Intelligence. The source text comprises p. 3 of the issue.

1 See Document 280. For text of Khrushchevʼs January 16 speech, see Current Digest of the Soviet Press, vol. XV, No. 3, February 13, 1963, pp. 3-7, and No. 4, February 20, 1963, pp. 13-20.





387. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Thompson) to Secretary of State RuskSource


Washington, December 17, 1963.

SUBJECT

Suggested President/Khrushchev Meeting



You will note from the attached letter that Foy Kohler1 advocates a meeting between the President and Khrushchev not later than May of next year in either Vienna or Switzerland. Although I would suggest that we keep an open mind about such a possibility, I would not, myself, at this time, recommend such a meeting for the following reasons: 1. I should think it would be far better if the President could defer meeting Khrushchev until after the elections when he can face him with a mandate from the people based upon his campaign platform. I should also think that in any meeting shortly before the Party conventions, the President would be greatly handicapped in what he could say and do and that a meeting would risk injecting into the campaign East-West issues in a form that may not be helpful. The Soviets have given many indications on a low level that they recognize that major agreements with the United States will be difficult if not impossible until after our elections.

2. So far as Khrushchev is concerned, while I think he might like a meeting for reasons of prestige, I think that he also would be handicapped in any meeting at an early date. He will probably still be beset by internal difficulties and, more importantly, it is unlikely that his quarrel with the Chinese Communists will have reached a definitive stage. Moreover, he will not have had much time to see what direction the four new governments in the West are going to take.

3. While it would be possible to bill such a meeting merely as an opportunity for the two men to get acquainted along the lines of the Vienna meeting between President Kennedy and Mr. Khrushchev, I think that in fact this poses some difficulties. I think it would be essential for both parties to have at least some discussion of the Cuban and German and Berlin problems and, at this stage, I should think any such discussion would probably be harmful in the sense of resulting in a hardening of positions on both sides. Moreover, President Johnson has met Khrushchev when he visited the United States and has followed so closely our relations with the Soviet Union that I do not think the need is the same as it was with President Kennedy when he first took office.

4. I should also think that no matter how we tried to play such a meeting, it would disturb our Allies for a variety of reasons.





The views expressed above would be materially affected should the possibility of an agreement on some major subject develop between now and next Spring, but I think such a prospect most unlikely.



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL US-USSR. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Initialed by Thompson. Copies were sent to Ball, Harriman, and Bundy.

1 Document 385.





388. Memorandum for the RecordSource


Washington, December 18, 1963.

SUBJECT

Lunch with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin, December 18, 1963



I had a very agreeable two hours today with Ambassador Dobrynin. His first and dominant interest was to learn of the points of view and the process of action of the new Administration. I told him that the Presidentʼs first object was to strengthen the peace, and that he could rely on the depth and sincerity of the comments in this direction expressed by the President to Mr. Mikoyan1 and on a number of other occasions in recent weeks. I also told him that we were appreciative of the restraint and good will shown by the Soviet Government toward President Johnson.

The Ambassador seemed to accept these assurances, but said that he was concerned about one area—Cuba. He called attention to press reports of a re-examination of our Cuban policy and was at some pains to emphasize that such press reports always created concern in Moscow. I told him that any new American President would necessarily have to ask for a re-examination of the Cuban situation, since that situation was unsatisfactory to us both on the merits and in political terms. But I said that he could rely on the Presidentʼs assurance to Mikoyan that we did not intend to invade Cuba, and I told him that while we would continue to seek ways and means of strengthening our position toward the Castro regime, we had no intention of provoking a war in that area. I said that our position toward Cuba was not very different from what I understood to be the position of his government toward Berlin; I assumed that the leaders of the Soviet Government were dissatisfied with the situation in Berlin, but did not wish a war there, and that they might well be asking their staffs continuously what could be done to improve the situation in Berlin without provoking a war.

In response to his more general question about the new Administration, I told the Ambassador in a general way about the continuation in office of the principal officers of the Kennedy Administration. I described briefly the high quality and the good sense of the principal new staff officers at the White House. I told the Ambassador that he could continue to rely on the Secretary of State, Ambassador Thompson, and myself with respect to the most private communications. And when he suggested that the Attorney General might be less engaged in these problems, I told him not to be so sure—that the Attorney General was a very important member of this Administration, too, and continued to have a deep interest in foreign affairs. But later in the conversation when the Ambassador asked in the most explicit way where he should go with his most private messages, I told him that I thought his best bet was Ambassador Thompson.

The Ambassador and I had quite an exchange on Germany in which for a minute or two I thought he was going to talk quite informally about the importance of reaching a solution that would be more secure than the existing situation. I told him quite bluntly that the key to a more forthcoming position on our side was the possibility of self-determination for the East Germans, and said that it seemed to me that much could be done in the real interest of our two countries if the Soviets could accept the prospect of a change here.

In this connection the Ambassador gave me a long and emotional account of Soviet opinion of the Germans, pointing out the depth and strength of the emotional deposit of the two World Wars. I told him that we understand this feeling and respect it and that our own German policy was designed with this concern in mind. We discussed the MLF in the usual terms, but I think I made some slight progress in persuading him that our German policy, including our proposal for an MLF took account of the German right in a way in which his governmentʼs policy did not. At least he failed to answer my questions about the consequences for the German right of the standard Soviet policies which he was urging. The Ambassador, as on previous occasions, refused the contest when I made uncomplimentary remarks about Ulbricht.

We had an extended discussion of the wheat deal, in which I think we agreed that there had been an honest misunderstanding with respect to American bottoms and their prices. The Ambassador explained how he had been surprised to be instructed that he could offer to carry the wheat in American bottoms, and I explained that we had assumed that no such offer would be made except with an understanding of the costs implied. He said that, for his part, if anyone had asked him about the cost he would have been careful to reserve the Soviet position. I said that the value of the wheat deal seemed to me to be much greater than the difference in price still existing between the negotiators, and that therefore I would urge on his government an increased flexibility and responsiveness in seeking individual agreements. I said that it was very difficult for us to make a package deal but that, on the other hand, we had no desire to make profits on any small differential in price. The American bottoms were necessary to us for quite straightforward tactical reasons, relating especially to the attitude of the unions which would have to load the wheat. I had the impression that the Ambassador had only an incomplete understanding of the domestic complexities of the wheat deal from our point of view, and I think it may be useful for a more expert witness to give him another dose on this score. The Ambassador told me that his own government at the moment was quite discouraged about the wheat deal but that at least they were treating it in a low key, which he indicated had been his own urgent recommendation. I repeated that the political advantage was worth further effort, especially on the Soviet side.

The Ambassador went from this point to a discussion of the wider possibilities of trade and pointed out to me with considerable force and persuasiveness that the U.S. was at a big disadvantage with respect to trading opportunities with the Soviet Union simply because the Soviet official representing the American Division in all discussions was always at a disadvantage in Moscow when it came time to share out to foreign countries parts of the purchase programs authorized by higher authorities in Soviet economic planning. The official from the American Division almost always had to say that he could not guarantee delivery or terms, and under Soviet processes such uncertain bargains were seldom interesting.

The Ambassador returned at the end of the meal to the question of the new Presidentʼs personal style, and I repeated what I had said earlier about continuity and about the Presidentʼs commitment to peace. I also explained that this President, like President Kennedy, used both written papers and oral discussions, but in somewhat different proportions. I emphasized the new Presidentʼs skill in seeking and weighing the opinions of many different individuals, and the Ambassador said that the new Presidentʼs method sounded to him very much like that of Chairman Khrushchev.

We parted with a final toast to peace. On the whole this was the most searching and instructive conversation I have yet had with a Soviet diplomat. Somewhere in the middle of lunch, we switched from formal address to first names.

McGeorge Bundy2



* * *



* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Bundy Files. Secret.

1 See Documents 380 and 381.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.





389. Memorandum of ConversationSource


Washington, December 23, 1963.

SUBJECT

Mr. Halabyʼs Trip to Moscow—Status of U.S.-Soviet Civil Air Agreement



PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Mr. N. Halaby, Administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency

Ambassador Thompson

Mr. A. Ferguson, Director, Office of Aviation Affairs

Mr. Jenkins, SOV



Mr. Halaby began his report with reference to the fact that he is faced with a regular monthly press conference and a request for a VOA interview in the near future. Therefore, he desired to receive the Secretaryʼs views and guidance at this time.

Mr. Halaby reported that after discussions with Soviet officials1 he has found that there are no known insurmountable technical or operational obstacles to the New York-Moscow service which cannot be resolved either by us or by the Soviets. He found to his surprise that the Soviets intend to use the very large and out-dated TU-114 to initiate the service instead of the more modern four-jet Ilyushin-62. Mr. Halaby confirmed that he himself had flown the 114. He found that it has a serious noise problem and poses significant traffic control problems in the high-speed tight Idlewild landing patterns. However, the Soviets indicated to him that they are aware of our noise standards and can do such things as modify the propellers on the 114 if necessary.

Ambassador Thompson inquired about the teletype line envisaged in the Air Agreement for service messages between two air lines. Mr. Halaby said that Aeroflot indicated there would be no problem establishing the line as provided in the Agreement. They specified, however, that such a line would be limited to transmitting operational messages for the air service.

The Secretary asked what attitudes Mr. Halaby encountered toward the Air Agreement. Were technical people, for example, strongly interested in the Agreement. Mr Halaby responded that he found great interest among the Soviet officials with whom he spoke. He added that this was a little hard to understand since in any genuine competition in this field they would clearly be at a disadvantage. The Secretary said that the Soviets undoubtedly believe that it might assist them in their efforts to fly to other countries. He added that the Soviets will have to give something to the Danes and others in order to secure overflight privileges. “We want to stay out of this situation. Thatʼs their problem, not ours.”

Mr. Halaby explained that the service is scheduled to be non- stop but provides for four emergency points: at Shannon, Prestwick, Gander and Oslo. He continued that in accordance with his instructions he had laid out a schedule for technical talks before Aeroflot officials. However, three days later General Loginov responded that there would be no further technical talks until the bilateral agreement was formally signed. Under questioning Loginov indicated they estimate that four months would be required to complete technical preparations prior to service. Mr. Halaby explained that this is a minimal figure and that six months might be more realistic. Thus, it was determined in Moscow that if service is to begin this summer it would be necessary to sign the Air Agreement in January or February.

Mr. Halaby then discussed the Soviet officials with whom he met, explaining that Loginov is equivalent to the FAA, CAB, and airline presidents all wrapped up in one person. Mr. Dementiev, Chairman of the Committee for Aviation Production, is the equivalent of Mr. Webb, Harold Brown2 and several other figures. Mr. Halaby added that Dementiev had proposed a series of visits by Soviet civil aviation engineers to the United States and that such proposals are now being framed for negotiation within the cultural exchange negotiations beginning next month. In response to the Secretaryʼs question, Mr. Halaby affirmed that the Soviet Ministry of Foreign Affairs was represented at all his talks by Second Secretary Davydov of the American Section.

The Secretary stated that the timing of the signature of the Agreement and technical talks is important. If, for example, we were to lay our prestige on the line in signing the Agreement and then have the air services break down on technical grounds, this would be a serious problem for us. Mr. Halaby agreed, adding that it also would pose problems for the FAA in the form of pressure to issue an operation certificate to the Soviets as quickly as possible. He recalled that there is a precedent for such difficulties in the form of a BEA-Aeroflot agreement which was delayed two years after signature because of a noise factor in the Soviet aircraft. Mr. Halaby also pointed out that the TU-114 now flies internally, but only to Havana and New Delhi in foreign countries.

Each time he talked to Soviet officials, Mr. Halaby said, he always stressed that the Air Agreement is only one facet of the general question of accessibility or communication. He would refer to air corridors into Berlin, the need for a direct tie-line between our Embassy and Washington for telegraphic traffic, and access between consular representatives and American citizens in the Soviet Union. Soviet officials usually listened without comment, he added, but Deputy Foreign Minister Kuznetsov insisted these subjects are all separate. In response to the Secretaryʼs question, Mr. Halaby stated that there is nothing concrete in the Air Agreement regarding access to citizens except in the form of a provision for search and rescue in the event of a crash. He explained that the present agreement consists of the agreement itself, a technical agreed minute, and an agreement between Aeroflot and Pan American. The Secretary suggested that the latter should include a specific provision on access to citizens such as PAA personnel. Ambassador Thompson added that he felt we should only go ahead with the Air Agreement if we get either a leased line or consular convention including our requirement on consular access and notification.

Mr. Ferguson introduced the problem of the effect of the Agreement on United States interests in other areas, particularly in Latin America. The Secretary stated that these factors have all been considered and we have decided on balance that we should go ahead with the Air Agreement. He asked Mr. Halaby whether the Soviets have any impression that they will be able to fly on to Havana from New York. Mr. Halaby responded no, that it seems to be clear in their minds that such would not be the case. He then recounted the background of the distortion of this point by the Baltimore Sun and summarized his explanation to the President as to why the FAA follows the navigation of Aeroflot flights to Havanna. The Secretary opined that it is logical to keep track of Soviet aircraft off our coast and questioned whether the Soviets do not now have the right to make emergency landings in the United States during these flights. Mr Halaby confirmed that they do and that our airfield at Charleston, South Carolina, has been alerted for the possibility.

The Secretary stated that we will aim at signing the Air Agreement but not before February. He asked Mr. Halaby whether he owed a response of any kind to his opposite numbers in the U.S.S.R. Mr. Halaby explained that no action is necessary now with Aeroflot and that Dementievʼs exchange proposals are being handled in the cultural exchanges negotiations.

In response to Mr. Halabyʼs question, the Secretary advised him to make the following points in his press conference: 1. He had visited Moscow to hold technical discussions with his opposite numbers.

2. He has found that technical problems for Moscow-New York service could be worked out but that several details remain.

3. He has made a full report on his trip to the Secretary and to the President.





Ambassador Thompson suggested Mr. Halaby play down the results of his visit in order to avoid promoting the impression that the signing of the Agreement is imminent. The Secretary commented that as so often with the Soviets broad agreements break down over technical considerations. He recalled General Marshallʼs advice never to make arrangements in principle with the Soviets, but always in detail.

Mr. Halaby summarized by saying the fact the Soviets would have established organized flights to New York would inevitably mean that they will not send their planes to New York empty. There will be 14,000 seats a year in their aircraft. Secondly, he pointed out that in a US-Soviet competition in this field of civil aviation we have a clear superiority. In short, he concluded, this provides an opportunity to use the airplane for its intended purposes. The Secretary agreed, saying that “I would like to see us get ahead with this.”



* * *



* Source: Department of State, Central Files, ORG 7 FAA. Confidential. Drafted by Kempton B. Jenkins (SOV).

1 Halaby visited the Soviet Union December 8-18. Memoranda of his conversations with Kuznetsov on December 13 and with Loginov on December 17 were transmitted as enclosures to airgrams A-837, December 17, and A-876, December 24. (Ibid., POL 1 US-USSR and ORG 7 FAA)

2 James E. Webb, Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and Harold Brown, Director of Defense Research and Engineering.





390. Memorandum for the RecordSource


Washington, December 31, 1963.

Ambassador Dobrynin called on me this morning, at his request, to tell me that he had been thinking about our recent conversation1 and had some ideas which he wished to share with me as a result. He reminded me that we had discussed in a non-committal way the possibility that at some time in the future there might be a meeting between the President and Chairman Khrushchev, and he said that he now wished to give me his own further reflections on this matter. He then drew out of his pocket two sheets of handwriting and read a statement which I summarize below.

The Ambassador said that on reflection he believed it would add to the possibility of mutual understanding, and would therefore be useful, if the President and Chairman Khrushchev could hold a meeting. Such a meeting would allow them to become more closely acquainted and this acquaintanceship could be of positive importance because of the responsibilities which they carry as the leaders of the two greatest powers in the world. The Ambassador believed that such a meeting would be useful if it merely resulted in a better acquaintance between these two world leaders. The Ambassador expressed his opinion that in this respect the meeting in Vienna could now be seen, with the passage of time, to have had real value.

The Ambassador said that of course it would be even better if such a meeting could have concrete results. We were both familiar of course with the range of the problems before us and they could all be discussed, and the Soviet Government would welcome solutions even to the largest problems, but if the United States did not think that the time was right for such larger settlements, which was his impression, then perhaps there could be study of one or more similar matters which might be more ready for settlement.

The Ambassador thought it would be helpful to know whether the U.S. thought there were such problems, and what they might be, and what American proposal for agreement there might be. He was sure that any suggestions would be carefully studied in Moscow.

The Ambassador repeated his view that with or without specific agreements a meeting would be useful. He said that he well understood that such a meeting could not well take place after June or July because of the election in the United States.

Finally, the Ambassador said that in his view it was an open question as to who should take the initiative, and he said he was confident that if it were felt more convenient by the U.S. the initiative could easily be taken by Moscow.

I told the Ambassador that I was very much interested in his reflections and would engage in some reflection of my own and would communicate with him reasonably soon. I told him that one thought which did occur to me was that if there were to be any meeting in which no agreements were likely to be registered, it would be important not to create false hopes on either side. The Ambassador responded by saying that he thought it would be possible and desirable, in the event that such a meeting was held, that there should be an understanding between the governments as to their own view of its purpose and meaning, and that this view should then be communicated to the press.

In order to avoid giving the impression that I thought no agreements were possible, I added that I thought it would be very useful for both sides to review the possibilities for both small and large agreements. I said that I thought the Ambassador should understand that the U.S. was in fact ready for even the largest kinds of agreements, and regretted that on larger issues the Soviet Government still seemed to be urging solutions which did not seem workable to us. The Ambassador grinned, and we then turned to a discussion of the New Year, which is being celebrated in an imaginative way at the Soviet Embassy; the party begins at midnight Moscow time and continues until midnight American time.2

McGeorge Bundy3



* * *



* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Bundy Files. Secret.

1 Document 388.

2 Dobrynin states in In Confidence, p. 117, that he met with Bundy in December and Bundy “expressed an interest in a summit meeting provided it would lead to some kind of agreement lest a failure endanger Johnsonʼs election campaign the next year.” Khrushchev and Mikoyan were interested, according to Dobrynin, “but Gromyko was not, fearing Khrushchev might be carried away and ruin relations from the start without careful advance preparation.”

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.





Index


Abel, Col. Rudolf I., 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]-346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154]

Acheson, Dean, 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

Adenauer, Conrad, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2], 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 73], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 86], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 87], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 87], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 88], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 90], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 131], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 131], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 134]-333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 134], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 284], 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 289], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 350], 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 355], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 360]

Adzhubei, Aleksei I., 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 44], 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 142], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 146], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]n, 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 195], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 199] Humiliations suffered by, 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 150]-360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Kennedy-Khrushchev television exchange,

Kennedyʼs interviews with, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 102]-266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 134]-334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]-360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]





Afghanistan, 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 215], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 246]-520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 246], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 339]

Africa, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 6], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 265], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 289], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 309]

Aidit Dipa Nusantara, 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 280]

Airmen held by Soviets, release of: Powersʼ release, 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]-346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154]

RB-47 pilots, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 4], 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 9]-35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 16], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 195]





Air transport issue. See Civil Air Agreement.

Akalovsky, Alexander A., 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 50], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82], 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 178n [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 84], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 85], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 87], 225n [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 89], 320n [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 134], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 436n [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 253], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 346], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 362], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]

Albania, 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 127], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 160], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 160], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 165]

Albert, Carl, 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 91]

Aleksenko, G. V., 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

Algeria, 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 15], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 85], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 85], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 305]

Alkhimov (USSR), 815 [Pg. 815 is part of Doc. 371]

All-Asia consultative committee, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 100]

Alliance for Progress, 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 265]

Alphand, Hervé, 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 32, Doc. 33, and Doc. 34], 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]

Alsop, Stewart, 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 179], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 212]

Anderson, William O., 143n [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 73], 308n [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Andropov, Andrey, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 165]

Angola, 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 85]-190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 85]

Arends, Leslie C., 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 91]

Armenia, 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 309]

Armitage, John A., 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 72], 143n [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 73], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 241n [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 94], 242n [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Arms Control and Disarmament

Agency (ACDA), 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Aron, Raymond, 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]

Atomic Energy Commission, 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

Austrian Treaty, 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 87]

Avilov, 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 84]

Ayub Khan, Mohammad, 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 85]

Bacteriological warfare, 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 228]

Bakayev, Viktor, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 8]

Ball, George W., 251n [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 98], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 117], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185], 456n [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 514n [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 663n [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 313], 829n [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 377], 832n [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 379], 844n [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387] Sino-Soviet relations, 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 324]

Soviet domestic situation, 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 324]-683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 324]

Trade relations, 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 110], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 342], 789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 362] Bilateral arrangements, 786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 362], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 362], 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 362]

Lend-lease debt issue, 789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 362], 812 [Pg. 812 is part of Doc. 371]-813 [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 371]

MFN status for Soviet Union, 786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 362]

Wheat, 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 359]-777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 359], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 366]-797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 366], 799 [Pg. 799 is part of Doc. 366], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 366]-801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 366], 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]-810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 370], 811 [Pg. 811 is part of Doc. 371]-819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 371]





Baltic states, 442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]-443 [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 228]

Baraduc, Pierre, 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 151]

Baraz, Robert, 632n [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 296]

Barghoorn, Frederick C., 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]-824 [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 374], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 376], 830n [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 377]

Barnes, Harry G., Jr., 76n [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 29]

Barnsdale, William J., 442n [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

Bassow, Whitman, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 222]

Batista y Zaldivar, Fulgencio, 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 51]

Battle, Lucius D., 278n [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 110], 335n [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 135]

Bay of Pigs invasion. See under Cuba.

Behrman, Jack N., 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 366]

Belgium, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 85]

Belgrade Conference (1961), 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 117]

Beria, Lavrenty P., 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 304]

Berle, Adolph, 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

Berlin. See Germany-Berlin situation.

Berlin Air Safety Center (BASC), 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 226]

Berlin Steering Group, 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]

Beschloss, Michael, 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

Bessarabia, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 228]

Biryuzov, Marshal, 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 271]

Bissell, Richard, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Blagonravov, Anatoli A., 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 202]-445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204]

Blair, William McCormick, Jr., 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217]

Blair, Bill, 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]-805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 369]

Blough, Roger, 448n [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 207]

Boglov (USSR), 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]

Bohlen, Charles E., 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26]-66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 26], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 28]-75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 28], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 36], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 50], 121n [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 124n [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 132n [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 137n [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 149n [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 75], 164n [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82], 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 84], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 87], 242n [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 308n [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 334n [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 343n [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 146], 354n [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 382n [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 475n [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 223], 463n [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 213], 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360] Germany-Berlin situation, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 28], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 36], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 92], 463n [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 213]

Kennedy-Khrushehev television exchange, 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 167], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]-393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]

Kennedyʼs interviews with Soviet journalists, 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]

Laos, 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 36]-85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 36]

Limited Test Ban Treaty, 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]-720 [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]

Nuclear test ban, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 36]-86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

Preventive war issue, 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189]-433 [Pg. 433 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]

United Nations, Chinese representation in, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 28]-74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 28]

Vienna summit, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 28], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 28], 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]-238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 92]





Bolshakov, Georgi N., 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 102], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 320n [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 134], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 360n [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154]-365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 154], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]-390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 186], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]

Bolshoi Ballet, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 199]

Bolster, Edward A., 76n [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 29]

Borisov, Sergei A., 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 366]-801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 366], 806 [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 370]-810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 370], 811 [Pg. 811 is part of Doc. 371]-820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 825 [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 375]-827 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 375], 830 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 377]

Boster, Davis E., 124n [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 137n [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

Boun Oum, 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 73], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 150]

Bowles, Chester B., 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 2], 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 4], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 21], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 48], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 50], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 149n [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 75], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 215], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 246], 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 265]-576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 265] Afghanistan, 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 246]-520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 246]

Airmen held by Soviets, release of, 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]

China-India conflict, 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 265]-576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 265]

Cuban missile crisis, 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]-517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 246]

Dobryninʼs meetings with, 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]-521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]-576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 265], 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]-579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 267]

Germany-Berlin situation, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 121]-299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 121], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 246]-519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 246]

Menshikovʼs meeting with, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 121]-300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122]

Vienna summit, public announcement of, 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]-138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

Vietnam, 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]





Brandt, Willy, 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 280]

Brentano, Heinrich von, 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 350]

Brezhnev, Leonid I., 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 134], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 240], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 254], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 254], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 283], 684 [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Brimelow, T., 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 28]

British Guiana, 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 134], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 134]

Brodie, Henry, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 100]

Brook, Sir Norman, 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185]

Brown, Harold, 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 389]

Brown, Winthrop, 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]-435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Brubeck, William H., 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 263], 594n [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 300]-638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 300]

Bruce, David K. E., 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]-12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 2], 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185]

Bubnov, Igor D., 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 362]

Bulganin, Nikolai A., 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 87], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 339]

Bulgaria, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 30], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 362], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 362]

Bullitt, John, 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 366]

Bundy, McGeorge, 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 121n [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 84], 242n [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 109], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 110], 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 334n [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]-342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 392n [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 410n [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 184], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 186], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204], 456n [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 463n [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 213], 475n [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 223], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 224], 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 491n [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]-493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 233], 508n [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 243], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 543n [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 256], 546n [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 594n [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 625n [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 627n [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 292], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 300], 639n [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 301], 645n [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 305], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 721n [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 341], 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 373], 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 825 [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 375], 832n [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 379], 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 844n [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387] Dobryninʼs meetings with, 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]-676 [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]-848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389], 852 [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]-853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 390]





Bundy, William, 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]

Burdett, William C., Jr., 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185]

Burke, Adm. Arleigh, 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

Burma, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 85], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 100], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 309]

Burton, Robert E., 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 151]

Byrnes, John W., 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 91]

Byrnes (Professor), 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 62]

Caccia, Sir Harold, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]-75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 28]

Cambodia, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 85], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 275]-599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Canada, 774n [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 366]-797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 366], 809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 370]

Carroll, Joseph, 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]

Carter, Marshall, 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 234], 634n [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 298], 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 359]

Cash, Frank, 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

Castro, Fidel, 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 45]-99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 45], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 51], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 85], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 85], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 85], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 91], 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 134], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 258], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 262], 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 326]-694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 326], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 347]

Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) (see also Current Intelligence Weekly Reviews; National Intelligence Estimates; Special National Intelligence Estimates), 409n [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 184] Airmen held by Soviets, release of, 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 141]-345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 141]

Cuba, 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 234], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]

Laos, 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]

New Phase of Soviet Policy (report), 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 347]-747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 347]

Outer space research, Soviet program for, 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357]-770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358]

Sino-Soviet relations, 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 269]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 298]

Soviet foreign policy following Cuban missile crisis, 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 269]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]-595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]

“Soviet Policies: The Next Phase,” 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 305]-651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 306]





Chayes, Abram J., 124n [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 149n [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 75], 813 [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 371]-814 [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 371], 818 [Pg. 818 is part of Doc. 371]

Chiang Kai-shek, Generalissimo, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 50], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 50], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 85], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 85], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 85], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 207]

China, Peopleʼs Republic of (see also Sino-Soviet relations), 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 85], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 228]-485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 228] Conference of world Communist leaders (Jan., 1961), 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15]-42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 15]

India, conflict with, 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 265]-576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 265], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 289]-622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 289], 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 334], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 339]

Leadership of Communist world, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 1]-7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 1], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 160]-379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 187]

Militancy of, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 6]-19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 6]

Nuclear capability, 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 350]

Nuclear non-proliferation and, 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 228]-487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 228]

Nuclear test ban and, 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 76], 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

Southeast Asia and, 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 228]

Soviet-U.S. détente and, 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 347]-747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 347]

UN representation, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 28]-74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 28], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85]-192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 85]

Vienna summit discussions re, 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85]-194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 85], 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 85], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 95]

Yugoslavia, relations with, 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 334]-712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]





China, Republic of. See Taiwan.

Chiperfield, Robert B., 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 91]

Chou En-lai, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 165]

Churchill, Winston S., 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 212]

Civil Air Agreement, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 21], 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 98], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 350], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 355], 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389]-852 [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390] Agreement on terms, 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]-270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

Germany-Berlin situation and, 463n [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 213]

NATO and, 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 39]-91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]

Ruskʼs Soviet visit discussions, 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 341], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 342], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 345]-736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 345], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 349]

Signing issue, 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 266]-578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]-662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 312], 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356]-767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357]

U.S. objectives, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 29]-77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]





Clark, Hulda, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 222]

Clay, Gen. Lucius D., 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 91]

Cline, Ray S., 634n [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 298], 645n [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 305], 650n [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]

Colby, William, 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]

Commerce, U.S. Department of, 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 279], 798 [Pg. 798 is part of Doc. 366]

Commercial relations. See Trade relations.

Common Market, 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 187], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 207]-449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 207], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 212], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 246], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 284]-616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 289], 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Communication channel between Washington and Moscow, 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]-162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 99], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 151]-363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 151], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 154], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

Congo, 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 32, Doc. 33, and Doc. 34], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 85], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 91], 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 228], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 324] Soviet policy re, 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 15], 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]-69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 28], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 28], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 28]-75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 28], 93n [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 41], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 51], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 51], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 86]

Soviet view of U.S. policy, 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 45], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 223]





Congress, U.S., 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 75] Baltic states, resolution on, 442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]-443 [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Exchanges with Soviet legislature, 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 137]-340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

Germany-Berlin situation, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 91]-236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 91]

Thompsonʼs testimony, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 397n [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 175]

Trade relations, 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 362]-786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 362], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 362]

Wheat, 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 359], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 359]-777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 359]

Vienna summit, briefing for leadership re, 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 91]-237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]





Conquest, Robert, 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 142]

Coombs, Philip H., 149n [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 75], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 108]-273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 108], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 108], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 124]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Cooper, Col., 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 84]

Corona missions, 433 [Pg. 433 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]-434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

Cousins, Norman, 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 258], 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, and Doc. 295]-631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 295], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

Couve de Murville, Maurice, 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]-784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]

Cowles, Gardner, 430n [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 188]

Crankshaw, Edward, 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 238]

Cuba, 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 51]-118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 51], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 91], 442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 228], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 258], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 282], 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 330], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 347], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 360], 846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 388] Bay of Pigs invasion, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]-124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]-129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 64]

Fishing port for Soviet ships, 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 251]-530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 251]

Johnsonʼs statements on, 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 380], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 380]-836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 388]

Kennedyʼs assessment of, 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 134], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]-357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 150]

Laos situation, relation to, 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]--671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]

Missile crisis of 1962, 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 224], 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]-491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 234], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]-507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 289] Bowles-Dobrynin discussion, 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]-517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 246]

Kennedyʼs assessment of, 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]-588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 270]

Negotiations toward resolution, 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Ruskʼs assessment of, 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]-561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 262]

Salingerʼs assessment of, 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]-548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 258]

Soviet backdown, ramifications of, 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 256]-545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]-558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 269]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]-595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 305]-647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 305]

Soviet objectives, 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 271]-594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 326]





NIE 11-63 analysis, 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 326]-694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 326]

Ruskʼs Soviet visit discussions, 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 341]-722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 341], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 342]-726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 342], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 348]

Sabotage against, 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]-759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354]

Soviet commitment to, 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 471 [Pg. 471 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

Soviet economic assistance, 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 150]

Soviet military assistance, 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]-124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]-268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]

Soviet objectives in, 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 289], 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 326]

Soviet troop withdrawal, 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]-619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 322], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 323], 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 326], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 350], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]

Soviet view of U.S. policy, 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 45]-99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 45]

Threat to U.S. security interests, 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]-349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

U.S. economic and political pressure, 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 282]

U.S. invasion issue, 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 323]-679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 323]

Vienna summit discussions, 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 76]-160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 76], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 85], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 85], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 85], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 95]





Current Intelligence Weekly Reviews: 1961, 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 3]-14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 3], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 8]-27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 8], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15]-46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 15], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]-130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]-250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 118]-296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 131]-318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 136], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 136]

1962, 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 165]-387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 165], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]-402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]-405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 183]-408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 226], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]-512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 244], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 254]-541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]-594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]

1963, 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]-609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 280], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 284]-616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 317]-670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 334]-712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358]-774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367]-803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 843 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 386]-844 [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]





Curtis, John, 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 100]

Czechoslovakia, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 30], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 359], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 362]

Davies, Richard T., 47n [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 16], 108n [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 239n [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 93], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 248], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 252], 572n [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 264] Davis, Richard H., 47n [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 16], 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 108n [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 69], 137n [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 287n [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 116], 382n [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 600n [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 627n [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 292], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293]-629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, and Doc. 295], 672n [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 682n [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 324], 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 346], 837n [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

Davydov, 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 389]

Dean, Gen., 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 339]

Dean, Patrick, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 28]

Dean, Arthur H., 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 109], 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133]-319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 133], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 136], 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 216], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 226], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 284], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 349]

Defense Intelligence Agency, 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]

de Gaulle, Charles, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 3], 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 67], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 69], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 87], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 90], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 91], 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]-238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 92], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 161], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 284], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 284]-616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 289], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 323], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 350]

Dementiev (USSR), 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 389]

Diem. See Ngo Dinh Diem .

Dillon, C. Douglas, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 13], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]

Dirksen, Everett M., 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 91], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 91], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 91], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 91], 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Disarmament (see also Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Conference; Limited Test Ban Treaty; Nuclear nonproliferation; Nuclear test ban), 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 21], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 47]-104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 47], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 86], 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 261], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 305], 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 326], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 350], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 360] Economic aspects, 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 214]-466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

General and complete disarmament, U.S. proposals re, 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

Kennedyʼs assessment of, 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134]-328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 134]

NIE 11-9-62 analysis, 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 187]-426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 187]

Nuclear free zones, 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 187], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 323]

Outer space weapons ban, proposed, 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]-406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 207], 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 354]

Ruskʼs Soviet visit discussions, 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 341], 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]-725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 342]

Soviet economic situation and, 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 175]-398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 175]

Soviet proposals to UN, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 28], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 47], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 122]

Sovietsʼ propaganda use of disarmament issue, 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 207]-452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 207]

Soviet suspicion of U.S. motives, 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]

Summit meeting re, proposed, 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]-553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 259]

30% cut combined with sampling techniques, 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 175]-398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 175]

Troika principle, 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 80]-168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 86]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 86], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 131]-318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133]

U.S. two-track negotiating strategy, 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 263]-571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 263]

U.S.-U.K. discussion, 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 262]-564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 262]

Vienna summit discussions, 145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 73]-146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 73], 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 76]-159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 76], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 80]-168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 86], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 95]

War propaganda ban, proposed, 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 207]

Zonal plan of inspection, 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 214]-465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 214], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]





Disarmament Advisory Committee, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 207]

Dobrynin, Anatoli F., 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 42]-95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 43], 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 84], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 87], 410n [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 184], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 446n [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 253], 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 279], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 346], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 350], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 362], 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 366], 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 837 [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382] Accurate information on U.S. policies, concern about, 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 179]-404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 186]-414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]

Afghanistan, 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 246]-520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 246]

Appointment as Ambassador, 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]-341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

Bowlesʼ meetings with, 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]-521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]-576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 265], 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]-579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 267]

Bundyʼs meetings with, 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]-676 [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]-848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389], 852 [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]-853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 390]

Cambodia, 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 275]-599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

China-India conflict, 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 265]-576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 265], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Common Market, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 207]-449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 207], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 212], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]

Congo, 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 45], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 223]

Cuba, 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 45]-99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 45], 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]-517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 246], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 291], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 322], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 323]-679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 323], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 350], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]-759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 388],

Disarmament, 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 207], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 207]-453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 207], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 350]

Espionage, 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 830n [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 377]

Germany-Berlin situation, 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 207], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 212]-462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]-473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365], 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 388]-847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 388] UN troops for West Berlin, proposed, 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 226], 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 323]

U.S. commitment to West Berlin, 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 246]-519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 246]

War, prospect of, 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 207]-451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 207], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 350]-755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 350]





Harrimanʼs meeting with, 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]-599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Harrimanʼs visit to Moscow (1963), 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 315]-666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 315]

Johnson-Khrushchev meeting, proposed, 852 [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]-853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 390]

Kennedy-Khrushchev letters, 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 281]-611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 281]

Kennedyʼs meetings with, 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]-396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 174], 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 350]-757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Khrushchev visit to U.S. in 1962, proposed, 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 243]-509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 243]

Kohlerʼs meeting with, 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]-626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 291]

Laos, 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 174], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 265], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 275], 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, and Doc. 295], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 322], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 350]

Soviet-U.S. control of third parties, 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 323]-680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 323]

Letters of credence, 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]-396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 174]

Limited Test Ban Treaty, 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 243]-510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 265]

McCloyʼs meeting with, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 207]-453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 207]

Mikoyanʼs U.S. visit, 832 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 379]-833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380]

NATO-Warsaw Pact Non-Aggression Treaty, 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 323]-678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 323], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 350]-753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 350]

Nuclear non-proliferation, multilateral arrangements and, 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 225]-479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]-626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 291], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 322]

Nuclear test ban, 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 156], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 291], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 322]-676 [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323] Verification issue, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 207], 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 315]-667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 322]-675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 322]





Outer space research, 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 350]-757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Preventive war issue, 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189]-433 [Pg. 433 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 212]-461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 212]

Ruskʼs meetings with, 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 212]-462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 676 [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]-681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 323]

Ruskʼs visit to Soviet Union, 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 327]-703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

Schlesingerʼs meeting with, 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 223]-476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 223]

Southeast Asia, 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 350]

Soviet Union, 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 223], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 345]

Soviet-U.S. relations, 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 45]-99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 45], 676 [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]-677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 323], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 323]

Taiwan, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 207]-450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 207]

Thompsonʼs meetings with, 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 243]-510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]-667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 757n [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]-759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 377]-830 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 377], 832 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 379]-833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380]

Trade relations, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 212]-462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 345]-737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 345], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 350], 812 [Pg. 812 is part of Doc. 371], 829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 377]-830 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 377], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 388]

Udallʼs meeting with, 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 237]





Dominic I nuclear test series, 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Donovan, James, 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 141], 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154]

Dowling, Walter C., 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 28]

Drummond, Nelson, 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 245]-514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

Dryden, Hugh L., 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 443 [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204]

Duke, Angier B., 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]

Dulles, Allen W., 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 87], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 215]

Dulles, John Foster, 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 83], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Dutton, Frederick G., 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]-352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 145], 442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]-443 [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]-459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 211], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 359]

Eckstein, Ann, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 124]

Economic relations, Soviet-U.S. See Trade relations.

Egorov, Ivan, 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 341]

Egypt, 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 289]

Ehrenburg, Ilya, 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 304]-644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 304]

Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Conference, 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 296], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

Heads-of-government meeting, proposed, 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 156]-368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 156], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 165]

Eisenhower, Dwight D., 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 8], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 26], 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 26], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 47], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 51], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 84], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 87], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 211], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 251]

Ellender, Allen J., 339n [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 137], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 359]

Emerging countries. See Underdeveloped countries.

Espionage: Barghoorn case, 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]-824 [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 374], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 376], 830n [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 377]

Egorov case, 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 341]

Expulsions of diplomats, 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 245]-514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

Soviet Embassy officials and, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293]-629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, and Doc. 295]

U.S. Embassy officials and, 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]-596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]





Evans, Allan, 153n [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Evans, Harold, 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185]

Exchange program, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 32], 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]-122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 62], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 154], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 199], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 215], 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 240], 824 [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 374] Academic exchanges, 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 108], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 124]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]-352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 145], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 154]

Agricultural delegations, 471 [Pg. 471 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]-472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

Congressional exchanges, 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 137]-340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

Expansion of, 77-78

High-level exchanges, 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 237], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 240]-505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 240]

1962-1963 agreement, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 108]-276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 108], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 124]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 145], 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]

Ruskʼs Soviet visit discussions, 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 341], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 345]

Travel restrictions on Soviet citizens in U.S. and, 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 75], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 75]-152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 75], 408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]-409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 184]





Fanfani, Amintore, 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 117], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 117]

Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 300]-638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 300]

Federal Republic of Germany (FRG). See Germany, Federal Republic of. Fedorenko, Nikolai T., 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 281]

Ferguson, A., 851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 389]

Ferrey, Gilbert, 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 141]

Filippov (USSR), 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293]

Finletter, Thomas K., 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 292]

Fisher, Adrian S., 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

Floyd, Arva, 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 117]

Formosa. See Taiwan.

Foster, William C., 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 508n [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 243], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 281], 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

France, 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 32, Doc. 33, and Doc. 34], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85] 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 87], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 87], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 150], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 350]-753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 350], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 360], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 360] Common Market, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 284]-616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]

FRG, relations with, 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 289], 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Limited Test Ban Treaty, 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 360]-783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 360]

Nuclear test ban, 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 136], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 284], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 338]

Ruskʼs meeting with Couve, 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]-784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]





Franco y Bahamonde, Gen. Francisco, 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 85]

Frankel, Max, 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 246]

Freeman, Orville L., 471 [Pg. 471 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 472n [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 237], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 341] Wheat deal, 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359]-775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 359], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 359], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 359], 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 359], 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 366], 798 [Pg. 798 is part of Doc. 366], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 366], 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 366], 810n [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 370]





Freers, Edward L., 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 32, Doc. 33, and Doc. 34]

Frost Robert, 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Fulbright J. William, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 91], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 91], 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 344]

Fuller, Leon, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 100]

Furnas, Howard, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25]

Furtseva, Yekaterina F., 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 199]

Gagarin, Maj. Yuri, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 84]

Gaitskell, Hugh T. M., 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 91]

Galbraith, John Kenneth, 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]

Garst, Roswell, 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 44], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 84]

Garthoff, Raymond L., 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 256]-545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]

German Democratic Republic (CDR) (see also Germany-Berlin situation), 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 113]-284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 177], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 177], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]-609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 280]

Germany, Federal Republic of (FRG) (see also Germany-Berlin situation), 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 134], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 165], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 299], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 350] Flour sales to Soviet Union, 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 359], 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 359]

France, relations with, 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 289], 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Nuclear test ban, 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 342]-727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Nuclear weapons issue, 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 134]-333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 134], 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 289], 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 326], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 347]





Germany-Berlin situation, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 8], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 44], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 90], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 177], 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 212], 463n [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 213], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 226], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 261], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 305], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 330], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 383], 846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 388]-847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 388] Air access to Berlin, Soviet interference with, 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 156]-370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 165], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]-400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 177]

Airlifts to U.S. troops, possible, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 91], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 91]

Berlin Wall, 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]-281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 113], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 131], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 207]

Convoys to Berlin, Soviet detention of, 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]-795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365], 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]-804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

Deputy Foreign Ministers Conference, proposed, 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]-473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]

FRG control of West Berlin issue, 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 165], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 271]

GDR domestic unrest and, 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 113]-284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]

ICJ adjudication, proposed, 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 92]

Interim agreement, proposed, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 87]-225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 89]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 89]

International organ on access to Berlin, proposed, 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 169], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 177]

Kennedy-Khrushchev correspondence, 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 309n [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 127], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 169]

Kennedyʼs assessment of, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 102]-266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 134]-334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 150]-359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 150]

Kennedyʼs discussion with Congressional leadership, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 91]-236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 91]

Krollʼs five-point plan, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 131]-316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 131]

Modus vivendi proposal, 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 169]-392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 262], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 262], 569 [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 263]

Negotiations, 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 76], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 113], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 117]-291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 117], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 118]-294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 118], 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122]-302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 122], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 131], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163]-382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 169]-392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 177], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 235], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 284], 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]-617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

NIE 11-9-62 analysis, 422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 187]-425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 187]

NIE 11-63 analysis, 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 326]-692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 326]

Peace treaty issue, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 3], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 8]-27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 8], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 87]-225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 88], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 89]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 89], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 113], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 113]-283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 113], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 118]-294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 118], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 122], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 127]-310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 131], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 134], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 187], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 226], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 226], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 235], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 271]

Reunification option, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 87], 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 134], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 134], 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 355]

Ruskʼs Soviet visit discussions, 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 344]-732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 344], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 345]

SNIE 11-10-61 analysis, 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]-284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114] Southeast Asia and, 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]





Soviet commandantʼs office in Berlin, abolition of, 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 226], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 235]-496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 235]

Soviet “drift” re, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 188]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 188]

Soviet-FRG discussions, 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 64]-130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 131], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 165]-387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 165]

Soviet-GDR discussions, 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 165]-386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 165]

Soviet moderation re, 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 268]-581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 268], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 280]-609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 280], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329]-705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]

Soviet objectives, 93n [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 41]

Soviet preparations for conflict, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 118]-295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 118], 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]-347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 142]

Soviet-U.K. discussion, 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]-590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 271]

Summit meeting re, proposed, 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]-553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 259]

Thompson-Gromyko discussions, 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]-343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

Trade relations and, 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 134], 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 161], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 212]-462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]

UN consideration of, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 118], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 226]-482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 226], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 235]

UN headquarters in Berlin, proposed, 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 121], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 271]

UN troops for West Berlin, proposed, 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 226], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 271]-591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 271], 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 323]

U.S. policy, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 36], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 38], 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 233], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 246]-519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 246], 569 [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 263]-571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 263]

U.S. preparations for conflict, 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]-267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

U.S.-U.K. discussions, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 28]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 28], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 28], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 262]-561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 262]

Vienna summit discussions, 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 85]-197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 87]-225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 88], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 89]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 89], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 91]-236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 91], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 95]-249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

U.S. preparatory papers, 146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 73]-147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 73], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 76]-158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 76], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 80]-167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 80]

Vietnam and, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

War prospect, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 87]-223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 87], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 89]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 89], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 91], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 117], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 121]-299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 121], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]-347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 142], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 207]-451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 207], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 350]-755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 350]

Western acceptance of GDR, Soviet focus on, 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 347]-744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 347]

Western access to Berlin issue, 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 117], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 118], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 122]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 134], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 134]-331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 134], 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]-343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]





Ghana, 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]-120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 289]

Giles, Robert E., 825 [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 375]-827 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 375]

Gilpatric, Roswell L., 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 359]

Gizenga, Antoine, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]

Glenn, Col. John, 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 165]

Glintsev (USSR), 815 [Pg. 815 is part of Doc. 371]

Gomulka, Wladyslaw, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 118], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 118], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 122], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 280], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 289]

Goodman, Benny, 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 154], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 199]

Goodwin, Erwin, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 222]

Graves, William S., 187n [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 85]

Great Britain. See United Kingdom.

Greece, 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 121], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 228], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 246]

Greenhill, D.A., 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]

Gribble, Charles, 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 62]

Gromyko, Andrei A., 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 125n [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 84], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 86], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 87], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 87], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 94], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 131], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 185], 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 346], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 376], 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 378] Civil Air Agreement, 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 345]-736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 345]

Cuba, 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 348], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]

Disarmament, 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 47]-104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 47], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 86], 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 354]

Dobryninʼs appointment as Ambassador, 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

Exchange program, 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 108]-276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 108], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 345]

Germany-Berlin situation, 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 131], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 169]-392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 345], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 383] Negotiations, 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 131], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163]-382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 169]-392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 235], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 284], 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]-617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

Thompson-Gromyko discussions, 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]-343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]





Harrimanʼs visit to Moscow (1963), 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

Johnson-Khrushchev meeting, proposed, 853n [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 390]

Kennedyʼs meetings with, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 50]-115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 253]-534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 253], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]-794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

Kohlerʼs meetings with, 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]-546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354]-762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 354], 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383]-839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 383]

Laos, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 34], l06n, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 50]-113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 50], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 68], 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 87], 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 88], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 354]-762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 354]

Cease-fire, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 50]-112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 50], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

NATO-Warsaw Pact Non-Aggression Treaty, 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 354]

Nuclear non-proliferation, 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 225]-479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]

Nuclear test ban, 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 47], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 87], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 284] Verification issue, 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 86]-204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 86], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]





Outer space research, 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 354]

Ruskʼs meetings with, 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]-106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 86], 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 169]-392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 225], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 345]-737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 345], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 348], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 360]-781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 360], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 362]-791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Soviet Jews, treatment of, 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 211]

Soviet-U.S. relations, 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 345], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 358], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 363]-793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367]

Trade relations: Bilateral arrangements, 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 362]-788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 362]

Copyright issues, 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 362]-791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Finance and credit, 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 362]-789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 362]

Lend-lease debt issue, 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 362]-789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 362], 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]-794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

Pipeline, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 292], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 299]-636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 299]

Ruskʼs Soviet visit discussions, 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 345]-737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 345]





United Nations, 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 47], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 86]-201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 86], 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 354]-761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 354], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 358] Afro-Asian representation





U.S. Embassy in Moscow, communications link with Washington, 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]-546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 345], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 354]

Vienna summit, 121n [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]-131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 133n [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 67], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 86]





Grubyakov (USSR), 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Guinea, 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]-120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 85], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 289], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 305], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 324]

Guthrie, John C., 137n [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 153n [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 308n [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 354n [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 474n [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 222], 503n [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 600n [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 279], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293], 661n [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 672n [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 682n [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 324], 820n [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]

Hailsham, Viscount Quinton, 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 338]

Halaby, N.E., 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 266]-578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389]-852 [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]

Hammarskjöld, Dag, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 28], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 36], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 51], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 86], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 86], 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 87]

Hammer, Armand, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 32, Doc. 33, and Doc. 34], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 43], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 44]

Harassment of Soviet shipping, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 8], 468n [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]-493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 233], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 248], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 250]-528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]

Harriman, W. Averell, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 2], 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 26], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 68], 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 174], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 254], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 265], 682n [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 324], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 721n [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 341], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 342], 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 359], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 362], 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 844n [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387] Cambodia, 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 275]-599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Civil Air Agreement, 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 342], 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356]-767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357]

Congo, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 28], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 28], 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 28]

Dobryninʼs meeting with, 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]-599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Khrushchevʼs meeting with, 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 339]-718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Laos, 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 275], 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, and Doc. 295]

Settlement by Laotian factions, 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]-355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

Limited Test Ban Treaty, 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 338]

Moscow visit (1963), 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 315]-666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 315], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 316], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

Vietnam, 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]





Harrison, Max, 826 [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 375]

Hays, Lawrence B., 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 137]

Hedges, Jack, 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Herter, Christian, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 2], 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 211], 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 359]

Hickenlooper, Bourke B., 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 91]

Hillenbrand, Martin J., 508n [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 243], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 253]

Hilsman, Roger, 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]-491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]

Hitler, Adolf, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 13]

Hodges, Luther, 84n [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 36], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 43], 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 359], 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 359], 798 [Pg. 798 is part of Doc. 366], 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 366], 825 [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 375]-827 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 375]

Hoeven, Charles B., 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 91]

Home, Alexander Frederick Douglas, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 28], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 271], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]-729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 780n [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 360] Hood, Lord, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 28], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 28], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 28], 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 28]

Hooper, 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 39]

Hoxha, Enver, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 165], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 223]

Hughes, Thomas, 663n [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 313]

Humphrey, Hubert H., 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 85], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 91], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 91]-235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 91], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 91], 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Hungary, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 26], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 30]

Iceland, 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 39]-90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 39]

Ignatov (USSR), 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Ilichev, Leonid, 408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 254]

Imhof, Johannes V., 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]

Imhoof, Werner, 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]

Immigration and Naturalization Service, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 23]

India, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 100], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 228], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 304], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 309] China, conflict with, 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 265]-576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 265], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 289]-622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 289], 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 334], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 339]

Soviet relations with, 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 265], 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 334]





Indonesia, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 326]

International Business Machines (IBM) Company, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 13]

International Control Commission (ICC), 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 34], 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 85]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 85], 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 87], 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 88]

International Court of Justice (ICJ), 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 86], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 92]

International Tin Council, 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 98]

Iran, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 13], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 51], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 85]-185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 85], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 85], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 215], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 228], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 339]

Iraq, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 13], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 305], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 309], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 324]

Iron ore, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 87]

Isaakovich, Lev, 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 279]

Isenbergh, Max, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 108]

Italy, 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 121], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 350]

Ivanov, I. A., 824 [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 374], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 376]

Ivanov, Viktor M., 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 366]

Izvestia, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 122], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 146], 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 156], 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]

Jagan, Cheddi, 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 134]

Japan, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 87], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 98], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 98]

Javits, Jacob K., 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 137]

Jenkins, Kempton B., 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389]

Jews in Soviet Union, 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]-459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 211]

Johnson, G. Griffith, 766n [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 366], 812 [Pg. 812 is part of Doc. 371], 818 [Pg. 818 is part of Doc. 371], 825 [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 375]-826 [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 375]

Johnson, Lyndon B., 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 91], 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 137], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 378], 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385] Cuba, 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 380], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 380]-836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 388]

Johnson-Khrushchev meeting, proposed, 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]-842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 385], 844 [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]-845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 852 [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]-853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 390]

Khrushchevʼs meeting with (1959), 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380]-834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 380]

Khrushchevʼs message to, 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]-837 [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

Mikoyanʼs meeting with, 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380]-837 [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

Soviet inquiries about, 832 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 379]-833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380]





Johnson, Robert H., 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

Johnson, U. Alexis, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 514n [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 663n [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 313]

Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 289]-624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 359]

Jones, Ralph A., 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 124], 548n [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 258]

Journalists, 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]-109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 49], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 51], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 222] Restrictions on, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 23]-61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]-335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 135], 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 184]-410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 184]





Kaftanov, S.V., 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

Kamenev, V.M., 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 108]

Kamman, Curtis, 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Karpov, Viktor P., 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 279]

Kassim, Abdul Karim, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 91]

Kaysen, Carl, 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 110], 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]-553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 259], 650n [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 655n [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 309], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 721n [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 341], 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

Kearney, Richard, 343n [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Keating, Kenneth B., 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 315]

Keita, Modibo, 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 117]-291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 117], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 199]

Kekkonen, Urho K., 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 226], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 248]

Kennan, George F., 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25]-65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 26], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]-170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 81], 371n [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 158], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]-380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 161], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 289], 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 378]

Kennedy, John F., 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 48], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 85], 456n [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 650n [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 721n [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 341], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353] Adzhubeiʼs relations with U.S. officials, 353n [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 146]

Airmen held by Soviets, release of, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 9], 33n [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 11]

Civil Air Agreement, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 29], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 85], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 463n [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 213], 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 349], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 350]

Congo, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 85], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

Cuba, 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 134], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]-357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 150], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 282], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]-672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 342]-726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 342], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]-759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354] Missile crisis of 1962, 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 224], 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]-507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]-548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 258], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]-588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 270], 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Soviet troop withdrawal, 619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 350], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]





Disarmament, 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134]-328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 134], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]-406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]-725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 342], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 350]

East-West relations, Vienna summit discussion re, 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 85]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 85]

Espionage, 821n [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 373], 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 374]-824 [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 374], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 376], 830n [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 377]

Germany, Federal Republic of, 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 134]-333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 134], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 350]

Germany-Berlin situation, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 89], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 91]-236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 91], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]-280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 117], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 169], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204]-446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 463n [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 213] Convoys to Berlin, Soviet detention of, 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]-795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365], 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

International organ on access to Berlin, proposed, 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 169]

Kennedy-Khrushchev correspondence, 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 309n [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 127], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 169]

Kennedy assessment of, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 102]-266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 134]-334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 150]-359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 150]

Negotiations, 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 117]-291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 117], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 177]

Peace treaty issue, 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 87]-225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 88], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 89]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 89]

Reunification option, 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 134], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 134], 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 355]

U.S. preparations for conflict, 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

Vienna summit discussions, 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 85]-197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 87]-225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 88], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 89]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 89], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 91]-236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 91]

War prospect, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 87]-223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 87], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 89]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 89], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 91], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 117], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 350]-755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 350]

Western access to Berlin issue, 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 117], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 134]-331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 134]





Gromykoʼs meetings with, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 50]-115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 253]-534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 253], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]-794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

Harassment of Soviet shipping, 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]-493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 233], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 250]-527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 250]

Ideological struggle, Vienna summit discussion re, 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 83]-177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 83]

Kennedy-Khrushchev television exchange, 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]-389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 167], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 174]

Khrushchev, assessment of, 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 91]

Khrushchev-Stevenson meeting, proposed, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 4]-16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

Kohlerʼs first meeting with Khrushchev, 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]-493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 233]

Kohlerʼs report to, 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 355]-766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356]

Kuznetsovʼs meeting with, 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]-601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Laos, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 50]-113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 50], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 150], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 174], 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, and Doc. 295], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 350] Vienna summit discussions, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 85]-189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 85], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85], 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 85]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 85], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 87]-211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 87]





Limited Test Ban Treaty, 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 216], 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332] Soviet motivations, 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 349]-750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 349]





Macmillanʼs meeting with, 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185]-412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 185]

Mikoyanʼs meeting with, 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]-589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 271]

Military statements, controls on, 115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]-116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 51]

NATO-Warsaw Pact Non-Aggression Treaty, 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 342], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 350]-753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 350]

Neutralism, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 85]

Nuclear non-proliferation, 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 87], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 150]-358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 150], 660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310] Multilateral arrangements and, 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]-668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 316], 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 355]





Nuclear test ban, 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 87], 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 316], 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]-704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329] Atmospheric test ban, proposed, 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]-342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

FRG participation issue, 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 342]-727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Kennedy-Khrushchev correspondence, 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

Seismic detection and identification of tests, 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]

Verification issue, 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 87]-216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 87], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]-625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

Vienna summit discussions, 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 87]-216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 87], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 91]-234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 91]





Nuclear testing, 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133]-319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 133], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 350] U.S. resumption of testing, 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 109], 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]-285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 133], 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]





Nuclear weapons, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 122] Preventive war issue, 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189]-433 [Pg. 433 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 212]-461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 212]





Outer space research, 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 88] Soviet-U.S. collaboration, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 84], 443 [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 350]-757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 355], 767n [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357]





Overflights of Soviet territory, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 12], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

Ruskʼs visit to Soviet Union, 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]-727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 348], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 349]-750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 349]

Salingerʼs meetings with Khrushchev, 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

Sino-Soviet relations, 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 355]

Southeast Asia, 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 350]

Soviet domestic situation, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 102], 433 [Pg. 433 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]-434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

Soviet journalists, interviews with, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 102]-266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]-313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 134]-334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]-360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Soviet-U.S. relations, 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 134]-328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 134], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]-396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 174], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 186], 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 350]-757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 363]-793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]

Speeches, 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 767n [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357]

Steel price episode, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 207]

Summit meetings, attitude toward, 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 174], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185]-412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 185]

Trade relations, 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 134]-325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 134], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 338], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 349], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 350], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 355]-765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 355], 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]-794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365] Wheat, 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 359], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 359], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 359], 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 359], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 366], 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]-805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 369], 810n [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 370]





Travel restrictions on Soviet citizens in U.S., 408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 410n [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 184]

Vienna summit, 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 67], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82]-197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 87]-231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 90] Preparatory discussions, 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]-93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 41], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 69]-137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]





Vietnam, 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]

Soviet-U.S. talks, proposed, 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]

War by miscalculation, threat of, 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 83]-178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 85]

Wars of national liberation, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 85]-191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85]





Kennedy, Robert F., 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 121]-299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 121], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 141], 360n [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 154], 409n [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 184], 442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 224], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 275], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 832 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 379], 846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 388] Kennedy-Khrushchev letters, Soviet publication of, 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 281]-611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 281], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 284]

Kennedy-Khrushchev meeting in 1962, proposed, 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 258]-549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 258]

Kennedy-Khrushchev television exchange, 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]-362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 151], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 151], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154]-365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 154], 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158]-374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 174], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196] Cancellation of, 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]-390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]-393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]





Kent, Sherman, 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]-558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 634n [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 298]

Keppel, John, 153n [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Kharlamov, Mikhail A., 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 84], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 102], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 151], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 186], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 195]

Khrushchev, Nikita S., 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 134], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 280] Airmen held by Soviets, release of, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 9]-32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 35n [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]

China, Peopleʼs Republic of, 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85]-195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 85], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 339]

Communication channel between Washington and Moscow, 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 99], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 154]

Conference of world Communist leaders (Jan. 1961), 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15]-42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 15]

Congo, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 28], 93n [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 41], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 51], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 51], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 85]

Cousinsʼ meeting with, 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, and Doc. 295]-631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 295], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

Cuba, 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 51]-118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 51], 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 251]-530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 251], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]-759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354] Missile crisis of 1962, 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]-507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

Vienna summit discussions, 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 85], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 85], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 85]





Disarmament, 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 214]-466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217]

East-West relations, Vienna summit discussion re, 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 85]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 85]

Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Conference, 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 156]-368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 156], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 165]

Espionage, 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 376]

Exchange program, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 32], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 199], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 215]

GDR party congress (1963), 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]-609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 280]

Germany-Berlin situation, 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 44], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 87], 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 113], 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 161], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 305], 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368] Interim agreement, proposed, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 87]-225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88],

International organ on access to Berlin, proposed, 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 169]

Kennedy-Khrushchev correspondence, 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 309n [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 127], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 169]

Krollʼs five-point plan, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 131]-316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 131]

Negotiations, 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 113], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 117], 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 117]-291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 117], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 118]-294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 118]

Peace treaty issue, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 3], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 8]-27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 8], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 87]-225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 88], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 89]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 89], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 118]-294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 118], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 131], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 226], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 226]

Ruskʼs Soviet visit discussions, 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 344]-732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 344]

Soviet policy, 93n [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 41], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 188]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 188], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 280]-609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 280]

Soviet-FRG discussions, 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 64]-130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]

Soviet-U.K. discussion, 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]-590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 271]

UN consideration of, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 118], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 226]-482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 226]

UN troops for West Berlin, proposed, 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 271]-591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 271]

Vienna summit discussions, 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 85]-197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 87]-225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 88], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 89]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 89]

War prospect, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 87]-223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 87], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 89]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 89], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 91], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217]





Hammerʼs meetings with, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 32, Doc. 33, and Doc. 34], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 44]

Harassment of Soviet shipping, 468n [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 248], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 250]-528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]

Harrimanʼs meeting with, 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 339]-718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Harrimanʼs visit to Moscow (1963), 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

Health status, 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 42], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 183], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 252], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 304]

Ideological views, 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 83]-177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 83], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 344]-734 [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 344]

Johnson, message to, 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]-837 [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

Johnson-Khrushchev meeting, proposed, 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]-842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 385], 844 [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]-845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 852 [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]-853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 390]

Johnsonʼs meeting with (1959), 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380]-834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 380]

Kennedy assassination, 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 378]

Kennedy-Khrushchev television exchange, 360n [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154]-365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 154], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Kohlerʼs appointment as Ambassador, 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]

Kohlerʼs first meeting with, 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]-493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 233], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 248]-532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 252]

Laos, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 34], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 85]-187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 85], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85], 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 85], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 87]-211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 87], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Limited Test Ban Treaty, 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 338], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]-730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 344]

Military statements, 115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]-116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 51]

NATO-Warsaw Pact Non-Aggression Treaty, 163n [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 79], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

Neutralism, 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 85]-194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 85]

Nuclear non-proliferation, 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]-668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 316]

Nuclear test ban, 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 118], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 136], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 185], 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]-704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 338] Kennedy-Khrushchev correspondence, 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

Kennedy-Macmillan proposal of 1963, 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 316]

Seismic detection and identification of tests, 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 271]

Verification issue, 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 87]-216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 87], 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 251]-531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 251], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 322]-675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 322], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 338]

Vienna summit discussions, 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 87]-216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 87]





Nuclear testing, Soviet resumption of, 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 109], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 118], 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 214]

Outer space research, 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 44], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 84], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 165] Soviet-U.S. collaboration, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 84], 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 88], 443 [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]





Overflights of Soviet territory, 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 84], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 236], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 251]

Public image, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 15]-46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 15]

Ruskʼs meetings with, 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]-734 [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 344], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 346]-740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 346], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 348]

Salingerʼs meetings with, 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Sino-Soviet relations, 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 280], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 301], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 339] Khrushchev as target of Chinese criticism, 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 301], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 358], 844 [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

Khrushchevʼs views on, 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 15]-42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 15]

Polemical warfare, 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 280]

Soviet domestic situation, 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 289]-621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 289] Agriculture, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 84], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 295]

Chemical industry, 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 339]-717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 339]

Communist Party Congress (Oct., 1961), 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]-310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

Cultural clamp-down, 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 304]-644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 304]

De-Stalinization program, 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 295], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 326]

Economic situation, 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 44], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 102], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 249], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 305]-646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 305], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 347]-742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 347]

Fishing industry, 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]-467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 215]

Jews, treatment of, 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 211]

Military situation, 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 271]-592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 271], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 305]-646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 305], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 347]-742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 347]

Political turmoil, 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 142], 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 144], 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 160], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 188]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 188], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 301]-640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 317]-670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 326]-689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 326]

7-year plan,-466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217]

Succession issue, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 254], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]





Soviet foreign policy, 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]-37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 13], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 187], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187] Cold war tactics, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 228], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 228]-486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 228]

Khrushchevʼs speech to

Communist leaders on, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15]-42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 15]

Peaceful coexistence, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 15]t 485-486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 228], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 260]

Subversion of foreign governments, 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]-120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]





Soviet-U.S. relations, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 20]-54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 51], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 215], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 347]-747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 347]

Stalin, assessment of, 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 249], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 339]

Taiwan, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 207]-450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 207]

Thompsonʼs farewell meetings with, 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 214]-468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217]

Trade relations, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 13], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 32], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 43]-96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 44], 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 161], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 339], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 341], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 346]-740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 346], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 292], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 349]

Udallʼs meetings with, 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 236], 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 237], 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]-529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 251]

United Nations, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 28], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 44], 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 87]-212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 87]

U.S. journalists, interviews with, 430n [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 188]

U.S. visit in 1962, proposed, 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 243]-509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 243], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 248], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 252], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 258]-549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 258], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 260]-555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]

Vienna summit, 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 121n [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]; 171 Kennedy-Khrushchev meetings, 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]-197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 87]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 89]

Preparatory discussions, 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]-93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 41], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 42]

Soviet desire for meeting, 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 3]-14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 3]

U.S. preparatory papers, 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 72]-141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 72], 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]-161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 79]-164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]





Vietnam, 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]

War by miscalculation, threat of, 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 83]-178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 85]

Wars of national liberation, 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 15]-41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 15], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 85]-191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187]





Killham, Edward I., 149n [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 75]

Kirilenko, Andrei P., 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 188], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 254], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]

Kirkpatrick, 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 298]

Kirsch, Leonard, 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 62]

Kissinger, Henry A., 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 186]

Kluckhohn, F., 60n [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 23]

Kohler, Foy D., 32n [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 47n [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 16], 54n [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 57n [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 21], 76n [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 29], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 50], 121n [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 124n [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 132n [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 72], 143n [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 73], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82], 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 84], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 87], 239n [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 93], 242n [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 354n [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 382n [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 397n [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 175], 627n [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 292], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 346] Appointment as Ambassador, 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]-447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]

China-India conflict, 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 289]-622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 289]

Civil Air Agreement, 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 341], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 355]

Common Market, 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Communication channel between Washington and Moscow, 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

Congo, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]-69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 28], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 28]

Cuba, 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 251]-530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 251], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 289], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 289], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 291], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 341]-722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 341]

Disarmament, 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 341], 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 354]

Dobryninʼs meeting with, 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]-626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 291]

Espionage, 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 245]-514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 341], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 373]-824 [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 374]

Exchange program, 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 341]

Germany-Berlin situation, 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 355], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 383] Negotiations, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 284], 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]-617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

Soviet moderation re, 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 268]-581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 268]

U.S.-U.K. discussions, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 28]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 28]





Gromykoʼs meetings with, 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]-546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354]-762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 354], 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383]-839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 383]

Harassment of Soviet shipping, 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 248], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 250]-528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]

JCS, meeting with, 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 289]-624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Johnson-Khrushchev meeting, proposed, 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]-842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 385]

Kennedy assassination, 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 378]

Khrushchevʼs first meeting with, 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]-493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 233], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 248]-532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 252]

Khrushchev visit to U.S. in 1962, proposed, 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 248], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 252], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 260]-555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]

Kozlovʼs meeting with, 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]-542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 255]

Kuznetsovʼs meeting with, 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]-706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 330]

Laos, 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 341], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 354]-762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 354]

NATO multilateral nuclear force, 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 289]-624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

NATO-Warsaw Pact Non-Aggression Treaty, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 268], 720 [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]-721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 341], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 354]

Nuclear non-proliferation, 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]-626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 291], 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 355]

Nuclear test ban, 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 251]-531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 251], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 284], 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]-618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 291], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 316]

Outer space research, 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 354], 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 355]

Overflights of Soviet territory, 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 251]

Report to Kennedy, 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 355]-766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356]

Ruskʼs visit to Soviet Union, 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]-618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 327]-703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 720 [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]-724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

Sino-Soviet relations, 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 355]

Soviet domestic situation, 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 264]-573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 289]-621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 289], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 304]-644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 304]

Soviet-U.S. consular convention,

proposed, 77n [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 355]

Trade relations, 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 341], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 355] Pipeline, 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 299]-636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 299], 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 307], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 337]





Travel restrictions on Soviet citizens in U.S., 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 75]-153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

United Nations, 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 354]-761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 354]

U.S. Embassy in Moscow, 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]-546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 283], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 341]-723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 341], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 345], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 354]

Vienna summit, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 28]-73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 28], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 90]





Komer, Robert W., 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 543n [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 256], 655n [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 309]

Konev, Marshal Ivan S., 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 177]

Korea, 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 51], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 85], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 228]

Korean War, 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 249]

Kornienko, Georgi M., 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 69], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293]-629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, and Doc. 295], 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Korotchenko (USSR), 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 15]

Korovin, Yevgeni P., 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 354] Kosygin, Aleksei N., 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 28], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 183], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 199], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 240], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 254], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 254]-539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 254], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 260], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 261]

Kotoyama (Japan), 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 83]-177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 83]

Kovalev (USSR), 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 362]

Kozlov, Frol R., 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 28], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 183], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 199], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 240], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 254], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 254], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 260], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 271]-594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 326], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 326], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 347] Kohlerʼs meeting with, 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]-542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 255]





Krimer, William, 796n [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 366], 810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 370], 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 371]

Kroll, Hans, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 28], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 28], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 64]-130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 118]-293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 118], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 131]-316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 131], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 131]

Krylov, Boris N., 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 124]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Kupinsky, Ruth H., 627n [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 292]

Kushnir, Natalie, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 108]

Kuusinen, O.V., 408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 254]

Kuzmin (USSR), 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38]

Kuzminski, Nikolay I., 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 370], 811 [Pg. 811 is part of Doc. 371]

Kuznetsov, A. V., 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293]

Kuznetsov, Vasili V., 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 10], 35n [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 45], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 131], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 226], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 248], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 251], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 251], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 252], 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 255], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 341], 849n [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 389], 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 389] Cuban missile crisis, 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Disarmament, 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]

Ideological struggle, 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]-604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 278]

Kennedyʼs meeting with, 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]-601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Kohlerʼs meeting with, 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]-706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 330]

Trade relations, 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 279]-606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]





Lambert, Tom, 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

Landis, James M., 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]-270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

Landon, Gen. Truman H., 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163]

Laos, 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 15], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 26], 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 28], 106n [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 88], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 91], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 150], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 151], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 174], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 215], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 228], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 265], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 275], 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, and Doc. 295], 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 322], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 350] Cease-fire, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 50]-112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 50], 115n [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]

Communist military disruptions, 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]-435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]-437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]-490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]

Cuba situation, relation to, 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]

Declaration on the Neutrality of Laos (1962), 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]

Dispute between Princes, 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 354]-762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 354]

International conference on, 115n [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 68]

Neutrality issue, 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 32, Doc. 33, and Doc. 34]-82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 34], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 36]-85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 36]

Ruskʼs Soviet visit discussions, 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 341], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 342]

Settlement by Laotian factions, 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]-355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

Soviet-U.S. control of third parties, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 323]

Taiwanese troops in, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 50]-113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 50]

Vienna summit discussions, 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 85]-187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 85], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 85]-189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 85], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85], 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 85]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 85], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 87]-211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 87], 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 15] NSC briefing on, 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 95]

U.S. preparatory papers, 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 73]-148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 23]





Latin America, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 6], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 265], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 309], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 323]

Lausche, Frank J., 442n [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

LeMay, Maj. Gen. Curtis E., 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 289], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 289], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 289], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 289]

Lemnitzer, Gen. Lyman L., 249n [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Lenin, V.I., 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 45], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 134], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 165], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 244]-512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 244], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 295]

Levchenko, Nikifor M., 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

Lie, Trygve, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 28]

Lilienfeld, Georg von, 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Limited Test Ban Treaty, 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 255], 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 265], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]-713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 338], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]-730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 344], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 345] French position, 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 360]-783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 360]

Sino-Soviet relations and, 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 334], 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 347]-743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 347]

Soviet motivations, 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 349]-750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 349]

Soviet objections, 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 226], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 243]-510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]

Soviet propaganda use of, 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]-720 [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]

U.S. policy development, 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]-469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 216], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]-708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]





Lippmann, Walter, 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 69], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 85]

Lister, Walter, 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

Liu Shao-Chi, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 15], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 324]

Lodge, Henry Cabot, Jr., 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 44]-97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 44], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 195]

Loginov, Col. Gen. Yevgeni E., 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 849 [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 389]-850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 389]

Longshoremenʼs Labor Union, 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

Lovett, 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 216]

Lucet, Charles, 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]

Lumumba, Patrice, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 28], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 51], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 86]

Lyon, Cecil, 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Lysenko, Trofim P., 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26]

Macmillan, Harold, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2], 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 3], 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 87], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 90], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 91], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 91], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 131], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 271], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 271], 660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310] Kennedyʼs meeting with, 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185]-412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 185]

Nuclear test ban, 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 316]





Makashev (USSR), 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 362]

Makinen, Marvin, 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]-344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 141]

Malaya, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 228]

Malenkov, Georgi M., 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 87]

Mali, 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 85], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 289]

Malik, Yakov A., 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 278], 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]

Malinovsky, Marshal Rodion Ya., 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 2]-129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 64], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 212], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 260]

Mamedov, Enver, 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 186]

Mamedova, 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 373]

Manjulo, Aleksey N., 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 366], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 370], 809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 370]

Manning, Robert J., 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 474n [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 222], 578n [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]

Mansfield, Mike, 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 91]

Mansmann, Ernest J., 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 124]

Mao Tse-tung, 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 83], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 85], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 85], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 339]

Martens, Robert J., 127n [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 62], 351n [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]

Matthews, H. Freeman, 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 84], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 86]

Matveyev, 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 366]

McCloy, John J., 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 21], 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 161n [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 94], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 99], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 109], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 207], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 216], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 275] Common Market, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 207]-449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 207]

Disarmament, 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 207]-453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 207]

Dobryninʼs meeting with, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 207]-453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 207]

Germany-Berlin situation, 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 207]-451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 207]

Nuclear test ban, 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]-92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]-126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 207]

Taiwan, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 207]-450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 207]

Tax policy, U.S., 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 207]





McCone, John A., 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 216], 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 298], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385] Cuba, 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 224], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 234], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 282], 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]-619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]

Germany-Berlin situation, 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329]-705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]

Nuclear test ban, 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]-641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]

Soviet military situation, 433 [Pg. 433 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]-434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]





McCormack, John, 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 91]

McGhee, George C., 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 92], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 100], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 100], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 202], 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

McKone, Capt. John R., 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 9], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 12]

McNamara, Robert S., 164n [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 433n [Pg. 433 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385] Cuba, 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]

Germany-Berlin situation, 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204]-446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]-804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

Nuclear testing, 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 109], 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]





McSweeney, John M., 47n [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 16], 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 60n [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 23], 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 108n [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 124n [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 498n [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 236], 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 572n [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 264], 705n [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]

Meany, George, 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 359]

Melekh, Igor Y., 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]

Menshikov, Mikhail A., 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 47], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 50], 115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 84], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 86], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 87], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139] Bowlesʼ meeting with, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 121]-300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122]

Bruceʼs meeting with, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]-12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 2]

Laos, 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 32, Doc. 33, and Doc. 34]-82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 34], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 36]-85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 36]

Nuclear test ban, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 21], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 36]-86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

Ruskʼs meeting with, 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]-58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

Thompsonʼs assessment of, 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 45]

Trade relations, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 36], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 21]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 21]

Vienna summit, 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 69]-137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]





Midthun, Kermit S., 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 245]-514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

Mikoyan, Anastas I., 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 3], 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 13], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 28], 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 199], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 240], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 249], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 254], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 258], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 262], 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, and Doc. 295], 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 378], 853n [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 390] Hammerʼs meetings with, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 32, Doc. 33, and Doc. 34], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 44]

Kennedyʼs meeting with, 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]-589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 271]

Ruskʼs meetings with, 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 270]-589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 837 [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]-838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383].

Soviet succession issue, 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 254]-538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 254]

Trade relations, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 32]

U.S. visit following Kennedy assassination, 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 378], 832 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 379]-838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383]





Missile gap, 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

Moishev Ballet, 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 154]

Molochkov, Fyodor F., 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 84]

Molotov, Vyacheslav M., 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 13], 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 87], 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 150], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]-361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 151], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 249]

Mongolia, 205n [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 86], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 345]

Moore, George S., 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]-456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]

Morgan (engineer), 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 84]-181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 84]

Morgan, George, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 100]

Morocco, 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 289], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 304]

Morgan Thomas E., 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 91]

Mosely, Phillip, 548n [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 258]

Moses, Robert, 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 345]

Mowinkle, John, 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Muraviev, Dmitri D., 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 108]

Murphy, Charles S., 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 359], 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 366], 827 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 375]

Murrow, Edward R., 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 94]-242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 360n [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 151]-362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 151], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 151], 364n [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154]

Nasser, Gamal Abdel, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 85], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 91], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 324]

National Intelligence Estimates: NIE 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 6]-24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

NIE 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 1]-2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1]-61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

NIE 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2]-1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 357]-770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358]

NIE 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2]-4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 1]-60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 23], 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 282n [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 113]

NIE 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2]-5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 1]-62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]-379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 427n [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 187]

NIE 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2]-7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 1]-61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 282n [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 113]

NIE 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2]-8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 1]/1-61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]-297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

NIE 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2]-8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 1]-62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 434n [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

NIE 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2]-9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]-62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]-429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

NIE 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2]-9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]-63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 768 [Pg. 768 is part of Doc. 357]

NIE 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2]-63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 326]-701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 326]

NIE 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 36]-2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1]-62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 471 [Pg. 471 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

NIE 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 36]-62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]

NIE 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 36]-63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]





National liberation warfare. See Wars of national liberation.

National Security Action Memoranda: No. 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

No. 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]

No. 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]

No. 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 51], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 133]

No. 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 84], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 224]





National Security Council (NSC),

242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]-249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]-267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 282], 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]-619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359]-779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

Nehru, Jawaharlal, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 20], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 85], 288n [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 117], 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 117], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 118], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 118]-294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 118], 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 131], 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 265], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Neues Deutschland, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 122]

Neutralism, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 6], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 6], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 85]-194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 85]

Newsweek, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 222]

New York Worldʼs Fair, 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 345]

Ngo Dinh Diem, 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 51], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 215], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Nikolaev, G. A., 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293]

Nitze, Paul H., 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 84], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 86], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 86], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 86], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 86], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 86], 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 359]

Nixon, Richard M., 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 26], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 84], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 195]

Nkrumah, Kwame, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 85], 288n [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 117], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 118]

Nolting, Frederick, 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]

Norstad, Lt. Gen. Lauris, 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163]

North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 87], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 90], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 98], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 134], 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 134] Civil Air Agreement and, 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 39]-91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]

Differences among members, 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 323], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 347]

FRG and, 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 134]

Multilateral nuclear force, 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 150], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 225]-479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 289]-624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]-668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 316], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 322], 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383]

Non-Aggression Treaty with Warsaw Pact, 163n [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 79], 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 262], 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 262], 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 268], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 296]-633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 323]-678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 323], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 720 [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]-721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 341], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 342], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 350]-753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 350], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 354], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 360]-781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 360]





Novash, Victor, 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 266]

Novotny, Antonin, 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]

Nuclear-free zones, 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 187], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 323]

Nuclear non-proliferation, 660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310] Multilateral arrangements and, 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 225]-479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]-626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 291], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]-668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 316], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 322], 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 355], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 360]

Nuclear test ban and, 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 87]

Soviet policy, 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 228]-487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 228]

U.S. policy, 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 150]-358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 150]





Nuclear test ban (see also Limited Test Ban Treaty), 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 28], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 47], 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 76], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 87], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 185], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 187], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 291], 660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]-704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 330]-707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332] Atmospheric test ban, proposed, 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 118], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]-342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 156], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 316]

Chinese position, 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 76], 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

Cuban missile crisis and, 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 261]-557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 261]

French participation issue, 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 136], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 284], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 338]

FRG participation issue, 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 342]-727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

General disarmament issue, submergence in, 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]-250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Geneva Conference, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 21], 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]-126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]-250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 226]

Kennedy-Khrushchev correspondence, 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316] Publication of, 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 281]-611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 281], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 284]





McCloyʼs position, 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]-92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]

McConeʼs position, 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]-641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]

Privacy of discussions, 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 322]-676 [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

Seismic detection and identification of tests, 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]-455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 213], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 271]

Signing of treaty, 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]-618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

Soviet four-point proposal, 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 136]-338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 136]

Troika principle, 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 87]-212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 87], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 136]

Verification issue (see also Seismic detection above), 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 8], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 36]-86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 86]-204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 86], 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 87]-216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 87], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]-405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 207], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 226], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 251]-531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 251], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]-625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 295], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 315]-667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 322]-675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 322], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 338]

Vienna summit discussions, 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 86]-204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 86], 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 87]-216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 87], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 91]-234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 91], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 95]-246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 95]

U.S. preparatory papers, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 73]-144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 73], 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 76]-159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 76]





Nuclear testing, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 212], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 350] Soviet resumption of testing, 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 109], 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 118]-296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 177]-402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 214]

U.S. freedom of action to conduct tests, 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133]-319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 133]

U.S. resumption of testing, 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 109], 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]-285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 133], 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]





Nuclear weapons, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 122], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 150], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 350] FRG access to, 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 134]-333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 134], 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 289], 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 326], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 347]

Preventive war issue, 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189]-433 [Pg. 433 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 212]-461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 212]

Warsaw Pact and, 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 150]





Oehmann, 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Olmstead, Capt. Freeman B., 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 9], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 12]

Ormsby Gore, Sir David, 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185], 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]-565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

Outer space research, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 28], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 44], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 165], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 324] Soviet program, 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357]-770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358]

Soviet-U.S. collaboration, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 84], 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 88], 443 [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 350]-757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 354], 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 355], 767n [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357]

Vienna summit discussions, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 84], 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 88]

Outer space weapons ban, proposed, 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]-406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 207], 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 354]

Overflights of Soviet territory, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 22], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 84], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 236], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 251]

Suspension of, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 9], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 10], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 12]





Owen, Henry, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 100]

Owen, Robert I., 343n [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293], 672n [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

Packard, Robert, 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Pahlavi, Mohammed Reza, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 13], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 51], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 85], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 85], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 339]

Pahlin (USSR), 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 84]

Pakistan, 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 85], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 246], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 309]

Pan American Airways, 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357]

Pankey, Victor, 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 141]

Partial Test Ban Treaty. See Limited Test Ban Treaty

Pathet Lao/Viet Minh forces, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 85], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 85], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 265], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 323]

Patolichev, Nickolai S., 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 362]

Peaceful coexistence. See under Soviet foreign policy.

“Peaceful world community” campaign, 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 94]-242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Pelen, Pierre, 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]

Pelkhanov (USSR), 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 83]-177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 83]

Penkovsky, Col. Oleg V., 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

Perry, Jack R., 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 108]

Petrikovski, B. S., 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293]

Petrosyants, Andronik M., 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 345], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 354]

Philippines, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 228]

Phoumi Nosavan, Gen., 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 323], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 354], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 354]

Podgorny, N. V., 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 15], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Poland, 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]-78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 30], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 85]-195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 85], 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 249], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 250], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 362]

Policy Planning Council, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25]-63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]-238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 92], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 100]-263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]-489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]-660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]

Polyansky, Dmitry, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 15], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 254]

Ponomarev, Boris, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 165], 408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 254]

Portugal, 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 85]-190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 85], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85]

Powers, Francis Gary, 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]-346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154]

Pravda, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 122], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 165], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 358], 843 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 386]

Preventive war issue, 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189]-433 [Pg. 433 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 212]-461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 212]

Project Vela, 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 213]

Prokofiev, M. S., 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

Pryor, Frederick, 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 141], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154]

Puerto Rico, 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 279]-606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

Pugwash Conference on Science and World Affairs, 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]

Pushkin, Georgi M., 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 165], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Pysin, K. C., 471 [Pg. 471 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 472n [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 237]

Ramsey, Henry, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 100], 471n [Pg. 471 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 474n [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 222]

Rayburn, Sam, 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Reston, James B., 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 258], 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

Rhee, Syngman, 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 51]

Rice, Edward, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 100]

Rich, John, 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 151]

Ricketts, Adm. Claude V., 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 289]

Robb, M. A. M., 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185]

Roberts, Frank, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 28], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 271], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 271]

Rockefeller Foundation Science Project, 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

Rogers, J. T., 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 300]

Rornagna, Jack, 320n [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 134] Rornanovsky, S. K., 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 108]-272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 108], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 108], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 108], 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]

Roosevelt, Eleanor, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 32]

Roosevelt, Franklin D., 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 86], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 86], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 86], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 87], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 87]

Roosevelt, Franklin D., Jr., 812 [Pg. 812 is part of Doc. 371], 827 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 375]

Rostow, Walt W., 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 117], 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]-485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 228], 565n [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 655n [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 309] Cuba, 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]-124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]

Laos, 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]-437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

Vietnam, 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]





Rothwell, Bruce, 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]

Rubin, Ernest, 815 [Pg. 815 is part of Doc. 371]

Rumania, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 30], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 324], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 339]

Rusk, Dean, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 4], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 164n [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 84], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 87], 251n [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 98], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 117], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 364n [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 185], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 223], 483n [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 514n [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 253], 546n [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 565n [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 645n [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 305], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 313]-664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 832 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 379] Airmen held by Soviets, release of, 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]-35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 16], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 345n [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 141]

Civil Air Agreement, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 21], 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 39]-91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 849 [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 389]-852 [Pg. 852 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390] Ruskʼs Soviet visit discussions, 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 342], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 345]-736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 345]

Signing issue, 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 266], 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]-662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 312], 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356]

U.S. objectives, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 29]-77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]





Common Market, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 212], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]

Communication channel between Washington and Moscow, 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]-162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

Cousinsʼ meeting with, 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, and Doc. 295]-631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 295]

Couve'5 meeting with, 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]-784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]

Cuba, 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 282], 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 626n [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 291], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 348], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 360] Missile crisis of 1962, 490 [Pg. 490 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]-561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 262], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 323]-679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 323]

Soviet troop withdrawal, 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 323], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]





Disarmament, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 21], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 47]-104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 47], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 86], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 175], 398n [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 175], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 360] Rusk-Gromyko meeting at Vienna summit, 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 86]

Ruskʼs Soviet visit discussions, 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]-725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 342]

Troika principle, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 86]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 86]

U.S.-U.K. discussion, 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 262]-564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 262]





Dobryninʼs meetings with, 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 212]--462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 676 [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]-681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 323]

Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Conference, 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]

Espionage, 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 373]

Exchange program, 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]-78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 30], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 62], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 108], 306n [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 471 [Pg. 471 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]-472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 345]

Germany-Berlin situation, 249n [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 212], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]-473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 295], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 844 [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387] Convoys to Berlin, Soviet detention of, 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365], 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]-804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

Modus vivendi proposal, 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 169]-392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 262], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 262]

Negotiations, 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 169]-392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 235], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

NSC discussion

Peace treaty issue, 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 127]-310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

Southeast Asia and, 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

Soviet visit discussions, 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 344]-732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 344], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 345]

Trade relations and, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 212]-462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]

UN troops for West Berlin, proposed, 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 226], 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 323]

U.S.-U.K. discussions, 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 262]-561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 262]





Gromykoʼs meetings with, 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]-106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 86], 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 169]-392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 225], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 345]-737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 345], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 348], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 360]-781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 360], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 362]-791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Ideological struggle, 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]-604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 278], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 344]-734 [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 344]

Journalists, 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]-109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 49], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 335n [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 135], 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 184]-410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 184], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 222]

Kennedy-Khrushchev letters, publication of, 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 281]-611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 281]

Kennedy-Khrushchev television exchange, 371n [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 158]

Khrushchevʼs meetings with, 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]-734 [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 344], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 346]-740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 346], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 348]

Kohlerʼs appointment as Ambassador, 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]-447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]

Kuznetsovʼs meeting with, 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]-606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

Laos, 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 32, Doc. 33, and Doc. 34]-82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 34], 106n [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 68], 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 87], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]-437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 323]-680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 323], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 338]

Limited Test Ban Treaty, 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]-469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 216], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]-730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 344], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 345], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 360]-783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 360]

Menshikovʼs meeting with, 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]-58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

Mikoyanʼs meetings with, 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 270]-589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 837 [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]-838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383]

Mongolia, 205n [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 86] North Atlantic Treaty Organization, 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 323], 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383] Non-Aggression Treaty with Warsaw Pact, 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 262], 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 262], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 323]-678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 323], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 342], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 360]-781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 360]





Nuclear-free zones, 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 323]

Nuclear non-proliferation, 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 225]--479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 619 [Pg. 619 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 360]

Nuclear test ban, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 21], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343] Seismic detection, 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]-455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

Verification issue, 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 86]-204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 86], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]

Vienna summit discussions, 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 86]-204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 86]





Nuclear testing, 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133], 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 212]

Southeast Asia, 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

Soviet domestic situation, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]-310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385] Political turmoil, 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 164], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 301]





Soviet Embassy in Washington, 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]-287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 116], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 345]

Soviet-U.S. relations, 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 323], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 345], 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]-780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 360]

Soviet visit, 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]-618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]-674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 322], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 327]-703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328] Meetings with Khrushchev and Gromyko, 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]-740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 346], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 348]

Reports on, 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 348], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 349]-750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 349]

Tactics for discussions, 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]-729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]

Talking points, 720 [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]-727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]





Trade relations, 278n [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 110], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 279]-606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 292], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 360] Bilateral arrangements, 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 362]-788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 362]

Chemical plant equipment, 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 346]-739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 346]

Copyright issues, 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 362]-791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Crab meat, 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]-87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 47]

Finance and credit, 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 346], 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 362]-789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 362]

Germany-Berlin situation and, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 212]-462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]

Lend-lease debt issue, 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 362]-789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 362], 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]-794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

MFN status for Soviet Union, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 21]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 21], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 362]

Soviet visit, 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 342], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 345]-737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 345], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 346]-740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 346], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 349]

Scientific equipment, 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]-269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

Soviet emphasis on, 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]-383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 164]





Travel restrictions on Soviet citizens in U.S., 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 21], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 75], 153n [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]-410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 184]

United Nations, troika principle and, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 86]-201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 86]

U.S. Embassy in Moscow, 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 278], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]-673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 345]

Vienna summit, 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 90], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 72]-240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 93], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 100]-263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101] Preparatory discussions, 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 42]

Soviet-U.S. tensions and, 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 67]





Vietnam, 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]

VOA broadcasts into Soviet Union, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 360]-782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 360]

War by miscalculation, risk of, 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]-162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]

Worldwide anti-Communist campaign, program for, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 100]-263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]





Russell, Richard B., 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 91], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 91], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 344]

Sagatelyan, Mikhail R., 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 23]

Salinger, Pierre, 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 84], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 320n [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 134], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 151]-363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 151], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 154], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 186]-414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 432n [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 212], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 258]-549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 258] Cuba, 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 186]-414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]-549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 258]

Journalists, restrictions on, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 23], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]-335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 135]

Kennedy-Khrushchev television exchange, 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]-362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 151], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 151], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154]-365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 154] Cancellation of, 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]-390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]





Khrushchevʼs meetings with, 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]





Salisbury, Harrison, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 154]

Saltonstall, Leverett, 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 91]

Savage, Carlton, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 100]

Schaerf, Adolf, 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82]

Schelling, Thomas C., 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 99]

Schetchikov, Gen., 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 266]-578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]

Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr., 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]-342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 186], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 223]-477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 224]

Schroeder, Gerhard, 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 262], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Schwartz, Harry, 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 249]

Scissors, Richard C., 456n [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]

Scoville, Herbert, 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

Seaborg, Glenn T., 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 684 [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 345], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 354] Nuclear testing, 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]-285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 133]





Segonzac, Adalbert de, 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]

Semenov, Vladimir S., 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 253], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 362], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]

Serdyuk, Zinovy, 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 254]

Sharp (Canada), 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 366], 809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 370]

Shaw, John P., 153n [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Shehu, Mehmet, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 165]

Shelepin, Aleksandr, 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 254]

Shershnev, Eugeni S., 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 370], 816 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 371], 818 [Pg. 818 is part of Doc. 371]

Shishkin (USSR), 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

Shoup, Gen. David M., 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 289]

Shuckburgh, Sir Evelyn, 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185]

Shvernik, N. M., 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Sihanouk, Prince Norodom, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 34], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 275]

Sino-Soviet relations, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 6]-19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 6], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 150], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 150], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 246], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 298], 696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 326], 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 6], 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 355], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 358] Albania and, 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 160], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 165]

Break in relations, potential for, 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 160]-378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 160], 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 269]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Cuban missile crisis and, 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 269]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

International conference, proposed, 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]-607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 280]

Khrushchev as target of Chinese criticism, 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 301], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 358], 844 [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

Khrushchevʼs views on, 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 15]-42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 15]

Limited Test Ban Treaty and, 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 334], 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 347]-743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 347]

Objectivity of U.S. analyses, 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 298]

Polemical warfare, 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 244]-512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 244], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]-608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 280], 770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358]-773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 358]

Protracted stalemate, 843 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 386]-844 [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

Reconciliation efforts, 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 305], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 324], 696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 326], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 334]-712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

Soviet consulates in China, closing of, 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 244]

Soviet foreign policy, Chinese critique of, 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 187]-422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 187]

Vienna summit and, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 76]-156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 76]





Siscoe, Frank G., 77n [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]-122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 127n [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 62], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 108]-275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 108], 306n [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 471n [Pg. 471 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

Smirnov, Andrei A., 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 131]

Smirnovsky, Mikhail N., 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 23], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 36]-85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 36], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]-287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 116], 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 248], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 250], 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 327], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 373]-822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 374], 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 378], 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 837 [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

Smith, Bromley, 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 300]

Smith, Cmdr. Raymond D., 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 245]-514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

Snowden, Henry T., 766n [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356]

Sobolev, Arkady A., 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 214]

Sokolov (USSR), 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 108]

Soldatov, Aleksandr A., 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 142], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 271], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 271]

Somalia, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 85]

Sorensen, Theodore C., 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 159], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 167], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 186], 436n [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 578n [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 359]

Sorensen, Thomas C., 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 159]-374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]

Souphanouvong, Prince, 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 354], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 354]

Southeast Asia (see also Laos; Vietnam), 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 228], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 289], 696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 326], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 350]

Souvanna Phouma, Prince, 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 85], 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 87], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 150], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 265], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 322], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 350], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 354]-762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 354]

Soviet domestic situation, 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 15], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 223] Agriculture, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 15], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 84], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 188], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 295]

Chemical industry, 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 339]-717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 339], 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 347]

Communist Party Congress (Oct., 1961), 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]-310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 131]

Cultural clamp-down, 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 304]-644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 304], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 324]-683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 324], 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 326]

De-Stalinization program, 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 295], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 326]

Economic situation, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1]-3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 44], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 102], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 175]-398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 175], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 249], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 305]-646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 305], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 309], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 347]-742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 347]

Fishing industry, 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]-467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 215]

Forecast of developments 1960-1965, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1]-6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 1]

Foreign policy, impact on, 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 187]-427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 187], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 326]-698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 326]

Foreign publications, sale of, 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 223]

Jews, treatment of, 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]-459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 211]

Khrushchevʼs public image, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 15]-46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 15]

Kohlerʼs assessment of, 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 289]-621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 289]

May Day activities (1961), 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]-129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 64]

Military situation, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1]-5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 1], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 19], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26]-65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 26], 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]-297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133], 433 [Pg. 433 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]-434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 305]-646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 305], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 309]-658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 309], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 324], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 326], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 347]-742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 347], 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385] Long-range strategic weapons, 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 271]-592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 271]





Political system, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 1], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 183]-408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]

Political turmoil, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 15], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 142], 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]-361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 151], 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 160], 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 161], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 164], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 188], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 301]-640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 317]-670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 324], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 326]-689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 326]

Public mind, 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 160]-377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 160], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 309]

Religion, campaign against, 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 211]-459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 211] 7-year plan, 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217]

Space program, 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357]-770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358]

Succession issue, 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 240]-506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 254]-541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 326]-701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 326], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]





Soviet Embassy in Washington, 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]-287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 116], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293]-629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, and Doc. 295], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 345]

Soviet foreign policy (see also Sino-Soviet relations; specific countries and issues), 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 6], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 26], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 100], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 165], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 223] China-India conflict, 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 289]-622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 289]

Cold war tactics, 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]-486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 228]

Cuban missile crisis aftermath, 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]-558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 269]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]-595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 305]-647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 305]

Domestic political situation and, 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 187]-427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 187], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 326]-698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 326]

Forecast of developments 1960-1965, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 1]-9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

General principles and tactical methods, 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 187]-418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 187]

Inconsistencies in, 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 76]-156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 76]

Information policy, 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 264]-573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Khrushchevʼs speech to Communist leaders on, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 15]-42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 15]

Leadership of Communist world, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 1]-7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 1], 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 76]-156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 76], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 160]-379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 187]-428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 187], 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 326]-699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 326]

NIE 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2]-9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]-62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25]

arialysis, 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]-429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

NIE 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2]-63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]

analysis, 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 326]-701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 326]

Non-Communist world, policies toward, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 1]-9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

Peaceful coexistence, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 1], 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 1], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 15], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 76], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 94]-242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187]-421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 187], 422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 187], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 228]-486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 228], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 260]

Subversion of foreign governments, 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]-120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]

War, attitudes toward, 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 187]-420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187]

“World domination” issue, 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]-37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 13]





Soviet-U.S. relations (see also Airmen held by Soviets, release of; Civil Air Agreement; Espionage; Exchange program; Ideological struggle; Journalists; Overflights of Soviet territory; Trade relations; U.S. Embassy in Moscow; Vienna summit), 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 187], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 215], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 309], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 323], 684 [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 363]-793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364] Accommodation through negotiation, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 20]-54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

Communication channel between Washington and Moscow, 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]-162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 99], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 151]-363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 151], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 154], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

Consular convention, proposed, 77n [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 345], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 355]

Detente, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 188], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 347]-747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 347], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 358]-774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]-780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 360], 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367]-803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Harassment of Soviet shipping, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 8], 468n [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]-493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 233], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 248], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 250]-528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]

Kennanʼs assessment of, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25]-63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]

Kennedyʼs assessment of, 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 134]-328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 134]

Misunderstandings in, 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 45]-99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 45], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 51]

New U.S. administration, Soviet overtures to, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 2], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 8]-27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 8], 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]-59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 22]

Psychology of agreement, 676 [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]-677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 323]

Soviet information policies and, 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 264]-573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Travel restrictions on Soviet citizens in U.S., 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 21], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 75]-153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]-410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 184]

Udallʼs assessment of, 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 238]-502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]-505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 240]

U.S. policy following Cuban missile crisis, 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 263], 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 269]-586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 269]

U.S. policy planning, 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]-489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]-660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]





Spaak, Paul-Henri, 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 131]

Spain, 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 85], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 85]

Special National Intelligence Estimates: SNIE 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2]-10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 2]-61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]-284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]

SNIE 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2]-14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 3]-61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133]

SNIE 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2]-15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 4]-62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 235]-497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 235]

SNIE 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 2]-4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 1]-61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 283n [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 113]

SNIE 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]/1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204]

SNIE 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]-61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 34]

SNIE 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 32]-62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]-349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

SNIE 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 36]-3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1]-62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 234]





Spiridonov, Ivan V., 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 188], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 254]

Stalin, Joseph, 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 73], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 127], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 228], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 275], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 295], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 304]-644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 304], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 339] Khrushchevʼs assessment of, 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 249], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 339]





Staples, Eugene S., 572n [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 264], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 373]

Stelle, Charles C., 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

Stennis, John, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 212]

Stevenson, Adlai E., III, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 44], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 47], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 50], 115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 275] Cuban missile crisis, 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Khrushchev meeting, proposed, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 4]-16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]





Stikker, Dirk U., 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 292]

Stoessel, Walter J., Jr., 48n [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 373], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 376]

Stoffel, Albert W., 89n [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 39]

Strauss, Franz Josef, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 88], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 350]

Strauss, Lewis L., 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 251]

Subandrio, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 122]

Sukarno, Akmed, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 85], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 117]-291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 117]

Sukhodrev, Victor M., 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 50], 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 84], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 85], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 87], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 89], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 195], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 253], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 362], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]

Sulzberger, Cyrus, 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 117], 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 117], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 117], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 118], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 118], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 118], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 118], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 122]

Summit meetings (see also Vienna summit): Kennedyʼs attitude toward, 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 174], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185]-412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 185]

Khrushchevʼs attitude toward, 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 187]

U.S. policy re, 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]-553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 259], 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 263]





Supreme Soviet, 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 137]-340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

Suslov, Mikhail A., 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 15], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 100], 408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 240], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 254], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 254], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 254], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 326]

Sweeney, Joseph, 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185]

Taiwan, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 50]-113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 50], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85]-192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 85], 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 85], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 207]-450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 207], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 246]

Talbot, Phillips, 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 117]

Taylor, Gen. Maxwell, 433 [Pg. 433 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

Telstar satellite, 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 215]

Teplov, Leonid E, 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 378]

Thailand, 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 215]

Thant, U, 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 360]

Thompson, John, 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185]

Thompson, Llewellyn E., Jr., 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 8], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 51], 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 84], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 86], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 87], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 131], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 146], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 253], 546n [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 594n [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 600n [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 281], 655n [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 309], 661n [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 672n [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 678n [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 323], 682n [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 324], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 346], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 349]-751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 350], 766n [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 362], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 837n [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382] Airmen held by Soviets, release of: Powersʼs release, 125n [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]

RB-47 pilots, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 9]-32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 12], 35n [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

CIA analysis of Soviet policies, assessment of, 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]-651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 306]

Civil Air Agreement, 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 266], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 342], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 349], 849 [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 389], 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 389]-851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 389]

Communist world leaders, mind-set of, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 20]-52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 20]

Congo, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 28], 93n [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 41], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 45], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 51]

Congressional testimony, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 397n [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 175]

Cuba, 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 45]-99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 45], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 51]-118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 51], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 282], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]-759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354]

Disarmament, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 28], 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 86]-202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 86], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 175]-398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 175], 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 214]-466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215] Zonal plan of inspection, 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 214]-465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 214], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]





Dobryninʼs appointment as Ambassador, 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]-341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

Dobryninʼs concerns re U.S. policies, 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 179]-404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

Dobryninʼs meetings with, 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 243]-510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]-667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 757n [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]-759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 377]-830 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 377], 832 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 379]-833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380]

Espionage, 830n [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 377]

Exchange program, 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 137]-340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 199], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 215]

Germany-Berlin situation, 93n [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 41], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 188]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 188], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365] Negotiations, 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 290n [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 117], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163]-382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]

Peace treaty issue, 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

Soviet preparations for conflict, 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]-347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 142]

Thompson-Gromyko discussions, 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]-343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

U.S.-U.K. discussions, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 28]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 28], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 28]

War prospect, 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]-347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 142], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217]





Harrimanʼs visit to Moscow (1963), 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 315]-666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 315]

Johnson-Khrushchev meeting, proposed, 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 844 [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]-845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]

Kennedy-Khrushchev television exchange, 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158]-374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]

Kennedyʼs interviews with Soviet journalists, 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]-311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Khrushchev visit to U.S. in 1962, proposed, 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 243]-509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 243]

Khrushchevʼs farewell meetings with, 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 214]-468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217]

Laos, 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 28], 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 34], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

Limited Test Ban Treaty, 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 243]-510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 349]-750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 349]

Mikoyanʼs U.S. visit following Kennedy assassination, 832 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 379]-833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380]

NATO-Warsaw Pact Non-Aggression Treaty, 163n [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 79], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 342]

Nuclear test ban, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 28], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 86], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 156], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 213]

Verification issue, 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 315]-667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

Nuclear testing, Soviet resumption of, 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 109]

Outer space research, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 28], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 44]

Overflights of Soviet territory, 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 313]

Recall to Washington (Feb. 1961), 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 21], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]-68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]

Relief of Ambassadorship, 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]

Ruskʼs visit to Soviet Union, 724n [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 349]-750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 349]

Salingerʼs meetings with Khrushchev, 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Soviet domestic situation, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 44], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241] Military situation, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 19], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26]-65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 26]

Political turmoil, 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 142], 351n [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 188], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 301]-640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]

7-year plan, 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217]





Soviet foreign policy, 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]-37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 13], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]-120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 165]

Soviet-U.S. relations, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 20]-54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]-59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 22], 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 45]-99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 45], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 51], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 215]

Trade relations, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 13], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 43]-96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 44], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 345] Finance and credit, 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 349], 829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 377]-830 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 377]

Lend-lease debt issue, 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 818 [Pg. 818 is part of Doc. 371]

Pipeline, 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 307]-653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 307]

Wheat, 798 [Pg. 798 is part of Doc. 366], 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 370]-809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 370], 811 [Pg. 811 is part of Doc. 371], 815 [Pg. 815 is part of Doc. 371], 818 [Pg. 818 is part of Doc. 371], 830 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 377]





Vienna summit, 121n [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56] Preparatory discussions, 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]-93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 41], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 42]

Soviet-U.S. tensions and, 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]-132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 133n [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 67]

Thompsonʼs outlook, 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 79]-164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]

U.S.-U.K. discussion re, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 28], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 28]





Vietnam, 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163]





Tito, Marshal, 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 289], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 326], 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 334]

Togliatti, Palmiro, 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 280]

Trade relations, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 13], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 38], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 47], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 279]-606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 330], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 355]-765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 355] Agricultural commodities (see also Wheat below), 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 98], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 110]

Bilateral arrangements, 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 362]-788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 362]

Chemical plant equipment, 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 339], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 341], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 346]-739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 346]

Copyright issues, 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 362]-791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Crab meat, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]-87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 43], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 47]

Export controls, 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 98]-255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 98], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 279]

Finance and credit, 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 98], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 346]-740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 346], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 349], 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 362]-789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 362], 829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 377]-830 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 377]

General ground rules, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 98]-257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 98]

Germany-Berlin situation and, 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 134], 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 161], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 212]-462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]

International economic forums and, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 98]-257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 98]

Kennedyʼs assessment of, 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 134]-325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 134]

Lend-lease debt issue, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 32], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 36], 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 98], 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 362]-789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 362], 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]-794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 812 [Pg. 812 is part of Doc. 371]-813 [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 371], 818 [Pg. 818 is part of Doc. 371]

MFN status for Soviet Union, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 21]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 21], 786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 362], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 362]

Pipeline, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 292], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 299]-636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 299], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 307]-653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 307], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 309], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 337]

Ruskʼs Soviet visit discussions, 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 341], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 342], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 345]-737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 345], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 346]-740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 346], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 349]

Scientific equipment, 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]-269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

Soviet emphasis on, 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]-380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 161], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]-383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 164]

Soviet importing interests, 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 43], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 44]

Textiles, 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 350]

Underdeveloped countries and 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 98]-256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 98]

U.S. policy re economic relations with Soviet bloc, 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 98]-259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

U.S. review of, 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 309]-660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]

Wheat, 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359]-779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 360], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 366]-801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 366], 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369], 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 825 [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 375]-827 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 375], 830 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 377], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 388]





Travel restrictions on Soviet citizens in U.S., 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 21], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 75]-153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]-410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 184]

Trezise, Philip H., 661n [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]

Troika principle, 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 76] Disarmament, 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 80]-168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 86]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 86], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 131]-318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133]

Nuclear test ban, 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 87]-212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 87], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 136]

United Nations, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 86]-201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 86], 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 87]-212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 87]





Troyanovsky, Aleksandr A., 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 84]

Trujillo y Molina, Generalissimo Rafael L., 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 134]

Tsarapkin, Semen K., 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]-250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 136], 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 259], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 271], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 281], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 284], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

Tshombe, Moise, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 85], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 223]

Tubby, Roger W., 47n [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 16], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]-49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 23]-61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 149n [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 75]

Tuchman, Barbara, 516n [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 246]

Tunisia, 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 305]

Turkey, 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 85], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 85], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 85], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 228], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 246], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 270]

Tvardovsky, Aleksandr T., 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Tyler, William R., 287n [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 116], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185], 463n [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 213], 474n [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 222], 475n [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 223], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]-505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 240], 508n [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 243], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 262], 625n [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 627n [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 292], 661n [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 682n [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 324], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 362], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 793 [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381] Powersʼs release, 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]-346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]





Udall, Stewart L., 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 236]-502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]-505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 240], 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]-529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 251]

Ulbricht, Walter, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 3], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 15], 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 28], 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 102], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 117], 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 131], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 134], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 144], 351n [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 165], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 207], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 271], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 280], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 280], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 347]

Underdeveloped countries, 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 6]-23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 6], 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 98] NIE 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2]-63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]

analysis, 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 326]-695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 326]

Political and social conditions, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 6]-22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 6]

Soviet policy re, 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 305]-649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 305], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 324], 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 326]-695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 326]

Soviet-U.S. competition re, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 6]-23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 6], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 309]

Soviet-U.s. trade relations and, 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 98]-256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 98]





United Kingdom, 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 87] Cacciaʼs meeting with U.S. officials, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]-75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 28]

Common Market, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 284]-616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]

Disarmament, U.S.-U.K. discussion re, 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 262]-564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 262]

Germany-Berlin situation, 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]-590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 271] U.S.-U.K. discussions, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 28]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 28], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 28], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 262]-561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 262]





Laos, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 28], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]

Limited Test Ban Treaty, 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

Nuclear test ban, 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

Soviet political turmoil, 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]

Trade relations with Soviet Union, 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 307]-653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 307]





United Nations, 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 6], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 47], 443 [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 207] Afro-Asian representation, 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 354]-761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 354]

Baltic states and, 443 [Pg. 443 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Berlin headquarters, proposed, 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 121], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 271]

Chinese representation, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 28]-74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 28], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85]-192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 85]

Congo situation, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]-69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 28], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 28], 93n [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 41], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 85], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 86]

Disarmament, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 28], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 47], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 122]

Germany-Berlin situation, consideration of, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 118], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 217], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 226]-482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 226], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 235]

Gromykoʼs speech (1963), 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 358]

Kennedy speeches, 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 767n [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357]

Reform initiatives, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 28], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 44]

Troika principle, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 86]-201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 86], 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 87]-212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 87]





U.S. Embassy in Moscow, 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 177], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291] Communications link with Washington, 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]-546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 278], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 283], 636n [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 299], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 300]-638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 300], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 341]-723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 341], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 345], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 354]

Espionage charges against officials, 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]-596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Soviet guardsʼ interference at entrances, 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]-673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

U.S. Information Agency (USIA), 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 16], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 94]





Valdes, Philip H., 354n [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 632n [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 296], 682n [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 324]

Varentsov, Marshal, 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 271]

Vatican, 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 295]-631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 295]

Venezuela, 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 258]

Vershinin, Air Marshal Constantin A., 164n [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]

Vienna summit, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 26]-67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 26], 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 90] Background paper for, 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]-161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

Briefing for Congressional leadership, 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 91]-237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Briefing for NSC, 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]-249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Briefings for Policy Planning Council, 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]-238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 92], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 100]-263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Diplomatsʼ post-summit talking points, 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 93]-240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 93]

Kennanʼs outlook, 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]-170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 81]

Kennedy-Khrushchev meetings (June 3), 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]-197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Kennedy-Khrushchev meetings (June 4), 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 87]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 89]

Preparatory discussions, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 2]-12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 2], 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]-93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 41], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 42], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 69]-137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

Public announcement of, 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]-138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

Rusk-Gromyko meeting, 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 86]

Scope paper for, 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 72]-142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 72]

Soviet desire for meeting, 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 3]-14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 3]

Soviet-US. tensions and, 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]-133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 67]

Summary of events, 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 82]-172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

Talking Points paper for, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 73]-148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

Thompsonʼs outlook, 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 79]-164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]

U.S. objectives, 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]

U.S. tactics, 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 72]-142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 72], 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]-168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]]

U.S.-U.K. discussion re, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 28]-73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 28], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 28]





Viet Minh. See Pathet Lao/Viet Minh forces.

Vietnam, 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 51], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 215], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 228], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 228], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276] Extension of conflict to North Vietnam, 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 309], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]

Soviet policy, 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 165]

Soviet-U.S. talks, proposed, 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]





Vinogradov, V. M., 79n [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 237], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 346]

Vinson, Carl, 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 91]

Voice of America (VOA), 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]-49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 151], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 360]-782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 360]

Volsky, Yuri I., 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 108], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 124]

Voronov, Gennady I., 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 254]

Voroshilov, Kliment Y., 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 44]

War by miscalculation, threat of, 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]-162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 95], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 99], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215] Vienna summit discussions, 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 83]-178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 85], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 85]





Wars of national liberation, 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 15]-41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 15], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 91], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187], 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 326]-695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 326] Sino-Soviet relations and, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187]

U.s. attitude toward, 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 80]-166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 80]

Vienna summit discussion, 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 85]-191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85]





Warsaw Pact, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 118]-295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 118], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 150] Non-Aggression Treaty with NATO, 163n [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 79], 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 262], 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 262], 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 268], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 296]-633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 323]-678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 323], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 720 [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]-721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 341], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 342], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 350]-753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 350], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 354], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 360]-781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 360]





Washburn, Abbot M., 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

Webb, James E., 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 389]

Webb, William, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 100]

Wechsler, Vladimir I., 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 345]

Wehmeyer, Donald A., 343n [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Weʼll Bury You (film), 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 258]-550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

Whitman, Walter G., 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 75]n, 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

Wiesner, Jerome B., 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 295], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 322], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 322]

Wiggin, C. D., 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]

Wiley, 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 91]

Williams, Haydn, 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

Wilson, Donald, 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 108]

Wilson, Evan, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25]

Wirtz, Willard W., 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 370]

Wood, Chalmers, 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

World Congress on General Disarmament and Peace, 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 165], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]-463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 213]





Worldwide anti-Communist campaign, program for, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 100]-263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Wriggins, Howard, 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 100]

Yarotski (USSR), 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 266]

Yelyutin, Vyacheslav P., 684 [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]

Yepishev, A. A., 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]-380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 161], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 164]

Yugoslavia, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 85], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 215], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 344], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 362] China, relations with, 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 334]-712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

Soviet relations with, 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 289], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 317], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 334]





Zamyatin, Leonid M., 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 195]

Zaslovsky, 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Zhukov, Georgi (Yuri) A., 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 32], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 124], 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 124], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 131], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 137], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 195], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]-463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 213], 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]-550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 295]

Zhukov, Marshal Georgi K., 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 51], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 317]-670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]

Zinchuk, Alexander, 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Zorin, Valerian A., 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 100], 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 131], 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 207], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 341], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 348], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 365], 822 [Pg. 822 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374]

Zulueta, Philip de, 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 185]





